The European Journal of Endocrinology Prize Lecture
EJE1
Understanding estrogen receptor gene regulation in breast cancer
Jason Carroll
UK
Estrogen receptor (ER) is the defining feature of luminal breast cancers, where it
functions as a transcription factor. ER requires associated proteins to interact with
the DNA, including the pioneer factors FoxA1 and GATA3, both of which
mediate where in the genome ER resides. In the absence of FoxA1, ER binding
and transcriptional activity is diminished, even in endocrine resistant contexts.
We have utilized ChIP-seq in primary tumor material, coupled with functional
analysis, to identify mechanisms that govern FoxA1-ER DNA interactions and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
the variables that alter binding capacity. Based on these findings, we have
screened chemical libraries to identify specific inhibitors of FoxA1, with the goal
of blocking ER function via inhibition of its associated pioneer factor. In addition,
we have sought to discover novel ER associated proteins that are involved in
endocrine resistance and to achieve this, we have established a method for rapid
unbiased discovery of protein interacting complexes, which we have applied to
discover ER and FoxA1 associated proteins. We find an unexpected interaction
between ER and progesterone receptor (PR) in ERC breast cancer. We show that
PR  is a  negative  regulator  of  the  ER  complex,  where  it  is  important  for
modulating cellular growth. Our findings suggest that there is substantial cross-
talk between parallel hormonal pathways and that we can use this information to
repurpose existing steroid receptor ligands for therapeutic use.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EJE1
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
clinical and research areas of interest, including pituitary tumors, thyroid disease, genetic causes of
endocrine cancers and rare inherited syndromes. Prof. Beckers has taken a particular interest in
endocrine education, authoring a highly regarded series of digital projects on aspects of pituitary
disease. He has published more than 250 original articles in journals such as the New England Journal
of Medicine, Endocrine Reviews, and the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. Research
highlights include the original characterization and description of the syndrome, Familial Isolated
Pituitary Adenomas (FIPA) and a newly described pediatric syndrome X-Linked Acrogigantism
(X-LAG).
Prof. Beckers has served two mandates as President of the Belgian Endocrine Society, has been the
Secretary of the European NeuroEndocrine Association (ENEA), and has organised many national and
international Congresses. Current research interests include the genetics of pituitary diseases, molecular
and genetic investigation of rare disorders of endocrine development, gigantism and acromegaly and the
study of new treatment options for aggressive endocrine tumors.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Geoffrey Harris Prize Winner
The European Society of Endocrinology is pleased to present the annual Geoffrey
Harris Prize. This prestigious prize is designed for established researchers in the
field of neuroendocrinology and is the first of its kind in Europe. The prize will
be presented at the annual European Congress of Endocrinology, where the
winner will be asked to give one of the main lectures, in addition to two other
lectures at future ESE scientific meetings.
Dr Albert Beckers MD, PhD, is Chief of the Department of Endocrinology at the
University Hospital Centre, Liège and Full Professor at the University of Liège,
Belgium. After completing his medical degree at the University of Louvain,
Belgium, Prof. Beckers undertook specialty training in Endocrinology, Internal
Medicine and Nuclear Medicine. He oversees a Department with multiple
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
The Geoffrey Harris Prize Lecture
GH1
Beyond the Adenoma Valley: from FIPA to gigantism and back
Albert Beckers
Belgium
‘Je  résolus  de  m’informer  du  pourquoi,  et  de  transformer  ma  volupté  en
connaissance’ Baudelaire.
One of the great blessings in life is to be able to work at something that inspires
and interests you. For me, exploration of the diseases caused by abnormal
neuroendocrine function has been my passion. Its complexity and interlinked
nature can be both startlingly confusing and, when better understood, remarkably
logical. But above all, the clinical impact of disordered neuroendocrine function
on the patient is often dramatic, and demands our attention and care.
Pituitary  hormonal  secretion  grabbed  my  interest  as  a  young  researcher,
particularly the abnormalities associated with pituitary adenomas, like my first
publications on FSH secreting and mammosomatotrope pituitary adenomas about
30 years ago. This interest has led me on a very interesting journey that has been
punctuated by research projects that have hopefully contributed positively to the
neuroendocrinology  field.  Usually  these  observations  have  very  ordinary
beginnings, usually in a normal endocrine clinic setting, while talking to my
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
patients and puzzling over a result that seems not to have an easy explanation.
From patients with unexplained familial occurrence of pituitary adenomas arose
the first studies that eventually gave rise to my description of familial isolated
pituitary adenomas (FIPA). From those FIPA cases, it was a logical step to
explore the role of the AIP gene in various settings, including its contribution to a
younger, more severe phenotype in acromegaly. This, in turn, led our work into
the area of gigantism, one that I have found fascinating since I was a young
researcher. This recently came full circle with the discovery of X-LAG syndrome,
a disorder of extreme pituitary gigantism due to a Xq26.3 microduplication,
which itself can present as FIPA. The act of counting off where my patients lived
on my drive home from work in the so-called Adenoma Valley provided the seed
for studies demonstrating the important prevalence of pituitary adenomas in the
general population.
While the initial observations might come from a mundane setting, the proof of a
clinically important finding is the work of many people. In the setting of rare
neuroendocrine disorder research where genetics plays a central role, the journey
to discovery must pass through many stations and airports. It involves the
collaboration and shared work of colleagues around the world, each contributing
their own vital piece of the jigsaw puzzle.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GH1
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Clinical Endocrinology Trust Award & Lecture
the University of Wurzburg for specialist training in Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, under the
auspices of Bruno Allolio. This was followed by postdoctoral training at the University of California at
San Francisco with Walter Miller. In 2002, she moved to Birmingham to work with Paul Stewart and
has stayed there ever since, initially as a Heisenberg Senior Fellow, then as a Medical Research Council
UK Senior Fellow and from 2006 as a Professor of Medicine.
Wiebke leads a large, multi-disciplinary research group working on steroid biology and biochemistry
and its translational applications, with a special focus on androgens, both in the context of rare adrenal
and gonadal disorders and common disease associated with adverse metabolic risk, such as polycystic
ovary syndrome and adrenal incidentaloma.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
The Clinical Endocrinology Trust (CET) Award is given for clinical research
that addresses aspects of endocrinology at the forefront of clinical practice. The
award is sponsored by the Clinical Endocrinology Trust, and consists of an
honorarium and a prize medal. The winner is invited to give a lecture at the
annual European Congress of Endocrinology.
Wiebke Arlt is the William Withering Chair of Medicine and Director of the
Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research at the University of
Birmingham. As a clinical endocrinologist she works at the Queen Elizabeth
Hospital Birmingham, where she leads the adrenal and reproductive endocrine
specialist services.
Wiebke has studied Medicine at the University of Cologne before moving to
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Clinical Endocrinology Trust Award & Lecture
CETL1
Adrenal
Wiebke Arlt
UK
Steroids are central regulators of human physiology and disease. Steroid synthesis
does not only taking place in adrenal and gonads but in all cells of the body that
are equipped with steroidogenic enzymes, which allows targeted tissue-specific
steroid activation and inactivation. We have developed steroid metabolomics as
an innovative approach to the understanding of steroid biology by combining
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
mass spectrometry-based steroid measurement with large scale data analysis with
machine  learning  based  computational  methods.  Over  recent  years,  steroid
metabolomics has emerged as a powerful tool for the dissection of disease
mechanisms and the development of personalized diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies  in  patients  with  adrenal  and  gonadal  disorders.  The  lecture  will
introduce the principles of steroid metabolomics and provide two recent examples
of its utility, both in the context of adrenal disease: firstly, as a biomarker tool for
identification and monitoring of malignancy in adrenal incidentalomas, and
secondly,  for  the  elucidation  of  novel  disease  mechanisms  in  primary
aldosteronism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.CETL1
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Plenary Lectures
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
PRRT, NETTER-1, and the new Era
PL1
Abstract unavailable.
Endocrine disruptors and the thyroid (Endorsed by
Endocrine Connections)
PL2
Environmental chemicals, thyroid signalling and early brain
development
Barbara Demeneix
France.
During  vertebrate  evolution  thyroid  hormone  acquired  multiple  roles  in
development, especially brain development. Examples include promotion of
myelination  thereby  increasing  speed  of  neuronal  transmission,  as  well  as
modulation of neuronal differentiation, as exemplified by the exquisite sensitivity
of the Purkinje neuron to thyroid hormone deficiency. Research in the last 15
years has demonstrated that early development, the first trimester of pregnancy in
humans, is an unexpectedly thyroid- hormone dependent period. In the same time
span we have witnessed an unprecedented increase in autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) incidence, correlated in many data sets with loss of IQ. Although, changes
in diagnosis and awareness can contribute the ASD increase, many authors
consider  that  environmental  factors,  possibly  exacerbating  genetic  suscep-
tibilities, are implicated. Four main arguments support this hypothesis. First,
increasing numbers of chemicals are found routinely in human amniotic fluid.
These  include,  pesticides,  plasticizers
(such  as  phthalates,  BPA),  nitrates,
perchlorate,  antimicrobials
(such  as  Triclosan),  flame-retardants,  surfactants
and mercury (produced by fossil fuel burning). Second, many of these chemical
categories can interfere with thyroid hormone signalling, a pathway essential for
orchestrating brain development. Third, prenatal exposure to many chemicals is
significantly associated with both IQ loss and increased ASD risk. Fourth,
production of many of these chemicals has risen exponentially in the last few
decades, continually increasing exposure. The cost of exposure in socio-economic
terms has been estimated for just two or three chemicals to be in the order of 150
billion Euros per annum for Europe. I will present and discuss data showing that
cocktails of these chemicals found in amniotic fluid can interfere with thyroid
hormone signalling and brain development, affecting genes and developmental
pathways (neuronal proliferation, migration) that are regularly associated with
brain development and with ASD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.PL2
Testosterone trials
PL3
Abstract unavailable.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Gut microbiota, inflammation and metabolism (Endorsed by
Endocrine Connections)
PL4
Modulation of the gut microbiome by nutrients is implicated in the
control of inflammation and metabolic disorders
Natalie Delzenne
Belgium.
Experimental data in animals, but also observational studies in patients, suggest
that dysbiosis, meaning changes in the composition and/or of the metabolic
activity of the gut microbiota, occurs upon the development of obesity and related
metabolic diseases In this presentation, we will evaluate the rationale to propose
prebiotic  approach
(consisting  in  the  administration  of  dietary  fermentable
carbohydrates able to change the gut microbiota composition or function) in the
management of metabolic disorders such as steatosis, insulin resistance, and
vascular dysfunction. We will show, in view of experimental data in animals, that
dietary glucans, arabinoxylans, or fructans can modulate host gene expression and
metabolism, by changing gut microbiota composition and function. Even if the
increase in Bifidobacteria remains the major and common signature of the
prebiotic approach, a complex modulation of the gut microbial ecology occurs
upon  prebiotic  treatment  in  obese  individuals,  which  extent  the  panel  of
interesting microbial targets in the management of obesity-related diseases. The
promotion of gut hormones release, changes in the gut barrier integrity, and/or
the  production  of  bacterial-derived  metabolites  could  all  participate  in  the
improvement  of  host  health  by  prebiotics.  Appropriate  human  intervention
studies are programmed in order to evaluate the interaction between the gut
microbiota and ‘non digestible’ food components, which might contribute to
adequate nutritional advices in the management of metabolic disorders.
I declare no conflict of interest concerning this presentation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.PL4
Insulin signalling and action
PL5
Abstract unavailable.
Bionic pancreas
PL6
Abstract unavailable.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Symposia
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Thyroid and Pregnancy
S1.1
At which TSH cut-off should we start LT4 therapy during pregnancy
Erik Alexander
USA.
Hypothyroidism in pregnancy is generally considered harmful. However, the
definition of hypothyroid during pregnancy remains controversial. Measurements
of maternal serum TSH have traditionally been used to define hypothyroidism,
with values O2.5 mIU/l generally warranting treatment. However, recent data
have suggested that the ‘normal’ reference range for serum TSH in healthy
pregnant women varies by region as well as by ethnicity. Importantly, changing
the upper reference range for maternal serum TSH during pregnancy from
2.5 mIU/l to 4.5 mIU/l can impact treatment decisions for millions of women
worldwide. This symposium will explore the most recent data pertaining to this
complex topic, and also explore the subgroup of pregnant women with normal
serum TSH values but low free thyroxine concentrations. What is a normal TSH
concentration during pregnancy? What values of serum TSH are harmful to the
pregnancy or the developing fetus?
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S1.1
S1.2
Abstract unavailable.
S1.3
Abstract unavailable.
Mixtures, medicines and diet, where now for endocrine
disrupting compounds? (Endorsed by Endocrine
Connections)
S2.1
Abstract unavailable.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
S2.2
Mixture effects of endocrine disrupters in animal models
Ulla Hass
Denmark.
Risk assessment of chemicals based on no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL)
from animal models is normally done for one chemical at a time, but several
endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) have been detected in mixtures in humans.
For combinations of EDCs with similar mechanism, there is clear evidence that
mixture effects can arise at doses around NOAELs. Also, the mixture effects can
be predicted based on dose-addition.
There is also good evidence that combinations of EDCs with diverse modes of
androgen action, but similar effects induce mixture effects when each component
is present at doses equal to NOAELs. We have investigated mixtures of a widely
used plasticizer, di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP); two fungicides, vinclozolin
and prochloraz; and a pharmaceutical, finasteride for effects on male sexual
development in the rat. When the four chemicals were combined at doses equal to
their NOAEL, significantly reduced anogenital distance (AGD) was observed in
male offspring. Surprisingly, the effect of combined exposure on malformations of
external sex organs was synergistic. For effects on AGD, retained nipples, and sex
organ weights, the combined effects were dose additive.
We have also studied effects of mixtures modelled based on high end human
intakes. We selected 13 EDCs where data about human exposures was available,
including phthalates, pesticides, UV-filters, bisphenol A, parabens and the drug
paracetamol. The results suggest that highly exposed women of reproductive age
may not be protected sufficiently against the combined effects of EDCs that affect
the hormonal milieu required for normal sexual differentiation of male foetuses.
In conclusion, the chemical-by-chemical approach in risk assessment appears as
insufficiently protective against the possibility of mixture effects. In most cases the
mixture effects were dose additive. Thus, cumulative risk assessment for endocrine
disrupters is both relevant and feasible and dose addition as an assessment method
is recommended.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S2.2
S2.3
EDCs: assessing the risks of exposure to environmental chemicals and
pharmaceuticals
Rod Mitchell
UK.
Many industrial chemicals and pharmaceutical products have been proposed to result
in endocrine disruption in humans. This includes potential effects on reproductive
development in males and females. Chemicals that have been proposed to impact on
male reproductive development include plasticizers, synthetic oestrogens and
analgesics. Much of the data on the effect of exposure to these agents are based on
studies conducted in rodent models; however, confirmation of such findings in
human model systems at human-relevant exposure levels are lacking.
We have developed model systems to determine the effects of exposure to a variety
of proposed ‘EDCs’ on human fetal testis development and function. Using a
xenograft system designed to reproduce normal fetal testis development and in-utero
hormonal environment, our results demonstrate important species differences in the
effects  of  exposure  to  chemicals  such  as  di-n-butyl  phthalate
(DBP)  and
diethylstilboestrol
(DES) in terms of testosterone  production. We have  also
demonstrated that exposure to analgesics, such as paracetamol, result in a significant
reduction in testosterone production and also impact on germ cell development in the
human fetal testis. Importantly, these effects are apparent at therapeutic levels of
exposure using a standard therapeutic regimen.
Our work, in addition to that of several other groups, highlight the importance of
choosing an appropriate model species, experimental system and relevant exposure
regimen in order to determine the potential impact of EDC exposure in humans.
Findings from rodent studies should, where possible, be confirmed using human
tissue models in order to determine the relevance to human health.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S2.3
Senescence and plasticity in the anterior pituitary
S3.1
Programmed cell senescence: IL-6 role in the pituitary
Eduardo Arzt
Cellular senescence is a state of permanent and stable proliferative arrest in G1
phase of the cell cycle through activation of the p53/p21 and pRb/p16 signalling
pathways. Oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) is a highly proliferative state,
which mimics transformation, but this mitotic burst is gradually replaced by
senescence. Several lines of evidence have implicated OIS as a vital cause of
arrest of benign neoplasms. Pituitary tumors are mostly benign, non-metastatic
and monoclonal neoplasms. The precise mechanisms underlying the unique
indolent growth of these benign adenomas remain unknown.
Normal pituitary cells are under auto-/paracrine control of numerous growth
factors. Altered expression of cytokines/growth factors and their receptors, has
been observed in pituitary tumors. IL-6 plays an important role in pituitary tumor
progression. IL-6 is produced by tumoral cells but is also delivered to the normal
or adenoma cells through folliculo stellate (FS) cells, which mix up with the
normal pituitary cells and further surround the pituitary tumors. It has been shown
that IL-6 inhibits normal pituitary cell proliferation and has opposite effects in
normal and tumoral pituitary cells.
IL-6 plays a key role in OIS induction indicating that IL-6 is a pleiotropic cytokine
that can function as an autocrine or paracrine tumorigenic factor. The fact that IL-6 is
a cytokine that participates in pituitary tumor development, in addition to the
findings of its role in OIS, makes this cytokine an attractive candidate as an
autocrine/paracrine stimulator of pituitary adenoma progression inducing OIS.
IL-6 maintains pituitary tumoral senescence by its autocrine action, providing a
natural model of IL-6 mediated adenoma OIS, which explains the benign nature of
these abundant adenomas.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S3.1
S3.2
Pituitary stem cells: quest for hidden functions
Hugo Vankelecom
The  pituitary  is  the
‘master’  endocrine  gland,  governing  the  fundamental
processes of body growth, metabolism, reproduction and stress. The past decade,
it progressively became clear that the pituitary, like many adult tissues, harbors
a population of stem cells. While the molecular portrayal of these cells is
continually expanding, their function remains essentially hidden. From recent
studies, the picture is emerging that the stem cells of the adult pituitary are highly
quiescent and only visibly wake up in pathological conditions.
Upon transgenic cell-ablation damage in the pituitary, the stem cell compartment
is promptly turned on with expansion and expression of the missing hormone.
This activation is accompanied by substantial regeneration of the lost hormonal
cells, a restorative competence that was unexpected in the mature gland. The
regenerative skill however rapidly disappears at aging, together with a decline in
the number and fitness of the stem cells. One function of the adult pituitary stem
cells may thus be hidden in the regenerative toolbox of the gland, at least during a
specified and limited time window.
Recent work also showed activation of the pituitary stem cell compartment during
tumor formation in the (mouse) gland. Moreover, pituitary tumors (from patients and
mice) contain a candidate ‘tumor stem cell’ (TSC) population. The pathogenesis of
pituitary tumors remains far from understood. A link between the tumor-driving
TSC and the pituitary stem cells may shed new light on tumorigenesis in the gland.
To conclude, decoding the hidden functions of the pituitary stem cells will not only
lead to better fundamental insights into their role but may also expose (novel) targets
for treating pituitary tumors and for regenerative intervention in pituitary deficiency
as caused by damage, tumors or aging. Yet, this functional unraveling has only just
begun.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S3.2
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
S3.3
Adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma: lessons from mouse models
Juan Pedro Martinez-Barbera
UK.
Adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma (ACP) is a paediatric pituitary tumour
that is associated with high morbidity due to the tendency of the tumour to
infiltrate locally into surrounding brain structures such as the hypothalamus and
visual tracts. We have developed mouse models for human ACP, which we are
using to better understand the pathogenesis of these human tumours as well as to
test novel targeted treatments. Using advanced imaging techniques such as X-ray
computed tomography (micro-CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), we
show that mouse and human tumours display similar radiological features and
reveal insights into the invasive properties of the human tumours. Complementing
our initial molecular studies on murine ACP, we have now completed whole-
transcriptomic analysis of 18 samples of human ACP (16 pediatric, one adult) and
six  control  samples.  Together,  mouse  and  human  studies  indicate  that  the
paracrine activities of senescent cells may be critical for tumour initiation and
growth.  The  molecular  studies  have  also  identified  several  dysregulated
pathways, offering potential new targets against human ACP, which are currently
being investigated in ongoing pre-clinical trials. Of note, inhibition of the sonic
hedgehog (SHH) pathway, activated in both murine and human ACP, provides no
benefit  to  the  treated  mice.  In  contrast, pathway  inhibition  leads  to  faster
progression of the tumours.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S3.3
How to diagnose endocrine disease in obese patients?
(Endorsed by the European Journal of Endocrinology)
S4.1
HPA axis abnormalities and metabolic syndrome
Eva Kassi
Greece.
MetS is a cluster of interconnected factors that directly increase the risk of
cardiovascular atherosclerotic diseases, and diabetes mellitus type 2. Visceral
obesity/insulin  resistance  have  gained  increasing  attention  as  the  core
manifestations of the syndrome. HPA axis is one of the main stress response
pathways. Apart from having a circadian activity also mediates the adaptive
response to stressors. A growing body of evidence point towards a strong
relationship between perturbations of HPA axis and metabolic syndrome.
Persistent over-stimulation of HPA axis by various stressors resulting to elevated
circulating glucocorticoids can lead to metabolic syndrome components. Cortisol
has been causally demonstrating to promote the accumulation of visceral adipose
cells and visceral obesity. Moreover, acting through various pathways it increases
the apetite, stimulates gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, lipolysis in subcutaneous
fat tissue and over time causes insulin resistance, diabetes, hyperlipidemia.
Importantly, disruption of fine tuning of the intracellular cortisol production - as it
is regulated by 11b-HSD enzyme in specific adipose depots as well as in other
essential metabolic organs also promotes metabolic syndrome phenotype.
Disrupted biological rythms such as those seen in sleep disorders and shift
workers have been shown to increase the risk of metabolic disorders such as
hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, central obesity and hypertension. Actually,
loss of circadian rhythm and glucocorticoid excess conditions seem to develop
similar metabolic disturbances; this indicate that the circadian CLOCK system
and stress-responsive HPA axis strongly cooperate with each other in physiology
and pathophysiology, however, details of such interaction at multiple levels
remain largely unexplored.
Finally,  epidemiological  studies  suggest  a  fetal  programming  of  metabolic
syndrome.  It is now becoming increasingly accepted that intra-uterine and
perinatal activation of HPA axis can cause epigenetic modifications which can
lead to metabolic disturbances later in life.
Given that the prevalence of metabolic syndrome has reached epidemic levels, a
better understanding of the role of HPA axis dysregulation in its pathophysiology
and vice-versa will help us to better design prevention and treatment strategies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S4.1
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
S4.2
Male hypogonadism and obesity: how to differentiate cause and
consequence
Felipe Casanueva
Spain
Male hypogonadism is generally associated with overweight or obesity and, in
these  situations  androgen  therapy  partially,  or  totally,  reverses  the  excess
adiposity. However, the opposing situation, i.e., the role of overweight on a
reduction of gonadal function has been scarcely studied. In fact, changes in body
morphology are complex because several factors such as age, social and lifestyle
influences, and the physiological response to stress can affect both problems,
adiposity excess and gonadal function. At the end both factors will mutually
interact. In a previous work, we have observed that obesity and overweight per se,
exert  a  profound  effect  on  male  gonadal  function  in  community  dwelling
individuals of middle-aged and elderly men. The situation of advanced age
provides a good model because the age-associated decline in testosterone function
is well described. Furthermore, the progressive reduction in gonadal function
associated with aging vanishes if obese and overweight individuals are separated
from the group. However, socioeconomic status, as well as lifestyle factors, has
been demonstrated as causal factors in the development of obesity and increased
waist circumference, and these factors, are at the same time inducers of gonadal
dysfunction, acting at central level. Considerable more work is needed in order to
clarify the interacting network of factors and, to understand if intervention to
counteract one of them may provide a focus for health promotion and prevention,
mostly at advanced ages.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S4.2
S4.3
Subclinical hypothyroidism and obesity: cause or consequence?
José Manuel Fernández-Real
Spain.
Levels of TSH respond to fluctuations in serum free T(4) (fT(4)) and remain in a
very narrow individual range. There exists current controversy regarding the
upper limit of normal serum TSH values above which treatment should be
indicated. In a cohort of healthy men from the general population, both serum
TSH and fT(4).TSH product were positively associated with fasting and postload
insulin concentration and negatively with insulin sensitivity.It was concluded that
thyroid function tests were intrinsically linked to variables of insulin resistance
and endothelial function. It is possible that underlying factors lead simultaneously
to increased serum TSH, insulin resistance, ensuing dyslipidemia, and altered
endothelial function even within current normal TSH levels.
In fact, type I iodothyronine 50 -deiodinase (D1) gene expression and activity were
found in adipose tissue of obese subjects, hinting at a role of 3,5,30 -triiodo-L-thyronine
formed by D1 in response to leptin in the modulation of adipose tissue metabolism. On
the other hand, recent observations disclosed that visceral adipose tissue m-Crystallin
was an adipose tissue factor linked to parameters of thyroid hormone action and might
mediate the interaction of thyroid function and insulin sensitivity.
Additionally, total (t)- and a splice variant (v)-TSHb were consistently detected in
adipose tissue from euthyroid subjects, and positively associated with serum total- and
LDL-cholesterol, the lipidomics and metabolomics profile of adipose tissue, and with
adipose tissue, liver and circulating markers known to change with cholesterol levels
TSHb could be an adipose tissue marker of hypothyroidism, possibly produced to
maintain energy storage during fasting.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S4.3
Adrenal incidentaloma guidelines
S5.1
Abstract unavailable.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
S5.2
Abstract unavailable.
S5.3
Abstract unavailable.
S5.4
Abstract unavailable.
S5.5
Abstract unavailable.
S5.6
Abstract unavailable.
S5.7
Abstract unavailable.
Characterization and treatment of thyroid cancer
S6.1
Abstract unavailable.
S6.2
Abstract unavailable.
S6.3
Dynamic risk stratification in the follow up of thyroid cancer
Barbara Jarzab
Poland.
The discussion which prognostic factors are the most reliable to adequately assess
the risk of cancer related death and relapse in differentiated thyroid cancers [DTC]
is ongoing. To date, age at diagnosis and distant metastases were considered as the
most important risk factors. Among other factors, that may influence both overall
and disease free survival, were male sex, some histopathological features such as:
tumor diameter, tumor grade, aggressive histotype, extrathyroidal extension,
angioinvasion, and lymph node involvement. However, the results of different
analyses, evaluating the role of any particular factor, are distinct. These divergent
data were the reason leading to a significant change in the approach to DTC risk
stratification. Currently, it is based on a continuous dynamic evaluation conducted
through the whole follow-up, because a rigid risk assessment at DTC diagnosis
does not reflect the real prognosis. The first evaluation, based according to the
ATA criteria only on histopathological findings and TNM classification, stratifies
a patient as low, intermediate or high risk. Next, during the further follow-up, the
risk is re-stratified on the basis of the treatment outcomes (classified as one of the
following  categories:  excellent  response,  incomplete  biochemical  response,
incomplete structural response or indeterminate response). On the one hand,
thanks to this re-stratification, patients demonstrating an excellent response to
therapy have a minimal risk of DTC recurrence, regardless of an initial risk class.
On the other hand, an incomplete response to initial therapy increases the
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
probability of persistent disease or DTC recurrence. Thus, the new approach
allows to avoid the over-treatment in subjects with an excellent response to the
initial therapy and simultaneously to select patients requiring a more intensive
monitoring due to a higher risk of DTC relapse.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S6.3
The chronic syndromes of patients with cured
pituitary diseases (Endorsed by the European
Journal of Endocrinology)
S7.1
Acromegaly: 10 years after cure
Johannes Romijn
The Netherlands.
Appropriate treatment of acromegaly results in biochemical control or cure and
reduces signs and symptoms, morbidity and excess mortality. Nonetheless, many
of these patients still have considerable decreases in quality of life parameters and
suffer  from  increased  morbidity  due  to  combinations  of factors,  including
pituitary insufficiency despite optimal endocrine substitution, irreversible effects
of previous GH/IGF-1 excess with complex multisystem morbidity, and the
effects  of  treatment  modalities.  Even  during  follow  up  after  long  term
biochemical control or cure many of these patients suffer from the complications
of previous GH/IGF-1 excess. These complications include sleep disorders,
acromegalic cardiac manifestations, especially in older patients, acromegalic
arthropathy (a distinct form of arthropathy) associated with arthralgias, aortic root
dilatation, intracranial saccular aneurysms, dolichocolon, diverticular disease,
and vertebral fractures despite normal bone density. Apparently, these long term
manifestations of acromegaly have major irreversible components.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S7.1
S7.2
Cushing’s disease: 10 years after cure
Elena Valassi
Spain.
Recent evidence suggests that resolution of hypercortisolism in Cushing’s disease
(CD) may not lead to complete remission of the clinical abnormalities associated
with this condition. In particular, elevated cardiovascular risk may persist in
‘cured’ CD patients long-term after eucortisolism has been achieved. This is
believed to be related with the maintenance of visceral obesity and altered
adipokine secretory pattern which perpetuate features of metabolic syndrome,
including impaired glucose tolerance, hypertension, dyslipidemia, atherosclerosis
and hypercoagulability. Nephrolithiasis and incomplete recovery of bone mineral
density have also been described in CD patients in remission. Moreover, previous
exposure to excess cortisol may have irreversible effects on the structures of the
central nervous system controlling cognitive function and mood. Thus, sustained
deterioration  of the cardiovascular system, bone remodelling and cognitive
function along with neuropsychological impairment might be associated with
high morbidity and poor quality of life in CD patients in remission for many years.
Furthermore, relapse of hypercortisolism is not infrequent, occurring in up to 66%
of patients within 10 years from successful surgery. This exposes the patients to
the deleterious effects of glucocorticoid excess again.
Life-long monitoring is mandatory in CD patients to diagnose recurrence, control
long-term complications of previous cortisol excess and, possibly, normalize life
expectancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S7.2
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
S7.3
Craniopharyngioma: 10 years after cure
Hermann L Muller
Germany.
Childhood-onset craniopharyngiomas are rare intracranial embryonal malfor-
mations of the sellar region arising from remnants of Rathke’s pouch that require
life-long  control  and  management  of  the  endocrine,  ophthalmological  and
neuropsychological  deficits  caused  by  the  tumors  and  their  treatment.
Craniopharyngiomas show low-grade histological malignancy and frequently
affect hypothalamic/pituitary regions and the optic chiasm due to their location.
Hypothalamic  involvement  and/or  treatment-related  lesions  to  the  above
structures result in impaired physical and social functionality that includes
severe  neuroendocrine  sequelae,  mainly  hypothalamic  obesity,  with  major
negative  impact  on  quality  of  life  in  surviving  patient.  Quality  of  life  in
craniopharyngioma  patients  with  hypothalamic  involvement  is  impaired  by
physical  fatigue,  reduced  motivation,  dyspnea,  diarrhea,  and  non-optimal
psychosocial development.
Hypothalamic obesity in craniopharyngioma patients is associated with a severe
increase in BMI during the early post-operative period. During long-term follow-
up of O12 years, the degree of obesity is plateauing at high levels. Patients with
craniopharyngiomas involving hypothalamic structures showed reduced 10-years
overall survival rates, whereas overall and progression-free survival rates are not
related to degree of resection. Accordingly, gross-total resection should be
avoided in cases of hypothalamic involvement to prevent further hypothalamic
damage, exacerbating sequelae.
As surgical expertise has been shown to have major impact on postoperative
morbidity, medical societies should establish criteria of adequate professional
expertise for the treatment and care of craniopharyngioma patients. Based on
these criteria, health authorities should organize the certification of centers of
excellence authorized for treatment and care of patients with this childhood
craniopharyngioma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S7.3
Primary aldosteronism
S8.1
Novel targets of mineralocorticoid receptor in human renal cells
Marc Lombes
Aldosterone exerts numerous pleiotropic functions, notably in the kidney where it
controls hydroelectrolytic homeostasis and ultimately blood pressure. Aldoster-
one acts by activating the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), a transcription factor
that  regulates  target  gene  expression.  Alteration  of  the  mineralocorticoid
signaling  leads  to  various  diseases  including  hypertension,  cardiovascular,
renal, metabolic or CNS disorders.
Aldosterone  mechanism  of  action  is  extremely  complex,  involving  several
intricate aspects (1) whereby kinetic and cross-talk dynamics appeared to play a
critical  role  in  the  control  of  transepithelial  sodium  transport.  An  overall
assessment of MR genomic targets by new tools was therefore highly desirable.
We setup the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with a specific anti-MR
antibody in highly differentiated human renal cells expressing GFP-MR. This
approach coupled with the innovative high-throughput sequencing technology
(ChiP seq, HiSeq) allowed identification of approximately one thousand direct
genomic MR targets. Computational analysis of these genomic sites defined a
specific MR response element (MRE) in which the AGtACAgxatGTtCt sequence
was the most prevalent motif. Of interest, most genomic MR-binding sites
(MBSs) (84%) are located at long distances (O10 kb and up to 150 kb) and
various directions from the transcriptional start sites of corresponding target
genes, either well-known or new mineralocorticoid-response genes. Specific
aldosterone-induced recruitment of MR on genomic sequences was validated by
ChIP-qPCR and correlated with concomitant and positive aldosterone-activated
transcriptional gene regulation as assayed by RT-qPCR. Of note, most MBSs
lacked MREs but harbored DNA recognition motifs for other transcription factors
(FOX, EGR1, AP1, PAX5) suggesting functional interaction (2). Dynamics of
MR recruitment and of its transcriptional co-regulators demonstrated that
finerenone, a novel non-steroidal MR antagonist, prevents assembly of active
transcriptional initiation complexes (3). These studies provide new insights into
aldosterone, MR-mediated renal signaling. Many unanswered questions remain
notably concerning specificity of corticosteroid receptor action yet opening
germane perspectives for mineralocorticoid-related pathophysiology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S8.1
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
S8.2
Revised guidelines for finding and treating primary aldosteronism
Franco Mantero
Italy.
Primary aldosteronism is an endocrine form of hypertension which is highly
prevalent among hypertensive population but its rate of detection is far lower than
its real prevalence.
This might be due to lack of adequate information or expertise in general
practitioners or even among hypertension specialists, other than endocrinologists.
As PA is common, and has a much higher cardiovascular risk profile than age-,
sex-, and blood pressure (BP)-matched essential hypertension, targeted treatment
is of obvious benefit to at-risk patients with hypertension. Thus, the challenge of
diagnosing this condition, correctly recognizing the subtype, and offering the
optimal specific treatment was faced in 2008 by the Endocrine Society who
published Clinical Guidelines for the Case Detection, Diagnosis, and Treatment
of Primary Aldosteronism (PA). Since than, new insights in understanding the
pathophysiology of PA and better diagnostic methods became available; on
the other hand, it was recognized that, in spite of the world-wide diffusion of the
Guidelines, an overwhelming majority of PA remain occult since most subjects
with PA are never screened. To address these issues, it was decided to update the
Guidelines, in the attempt either to incorporating insights from relevant studies
over the past seven years but also to offer, in the explicit recognition that PA as a
major public health issue, and not merely a matter of complex and expensive case
detection, diagnosis and treatment of individual patients, a simplified approach to
those hypertensives who are not fortunate enough to be studied in specialized
Centers. The new Guidelines, which are expected to appear within the current
year, build on and extend the previous ones in several points including: broader
indications for screening to include subjects with sustained BP above 150/100
mmHg; recognition that the prevalence of PA varies from 5% (and more APA) to
10% (and more IHA) according as more or less stringent cutoffs for ARR and
PAC are adopted; strengthening the case for timely diagnosis and treatment of
PA, based on mounting evidence for cardiovascular and renal damage; report of
new findings on molecular genetic of APA; suggestion of abbreviated work-up in
patients with clear cut signs of PA and definition of the conditions in which AVS
could be avoided; indication to tentatively treat with MR antagonist all cases with
elevated ARR who are unwilling or unable to proceed in the confirmatory/subtype
testing. The Guidelines will end with an outlook on the need of standardized
Aldosterone and Renin  assays, of more reliable confirmatory  tests, of less
invasive and more accessible imaging techniques, of new non-steroidal MR
antagonists, of institution of registries and, above all, of providing to all clinicians
involved in the field the ability to recognize PA as a possible (and treatable) cause
of hypertension in their patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S8.2
S8.3
Adrenal lessons from next-generation sequencing
Maria-Christina Zennaro
France.
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most common form of secondary hypertension.
In the majority of cases it is caused by unilateral aldosterone producing adenoma
(APA) or by bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Although the majority of cases of PA
are sporadic, the disease may occur in the context of familial hyperaldosteronism
where it is associated with specific germline mutations. Recent advances in
genome technology have improved our understanding on the genetic basis of PA,
allowing to identify and to characterize new familial forms of the disease as well
as somatic mutations involved in APA and to establish a pathophysiological
model of APA development. This talk will summarize our current knowledge on
the genetic basis of PA and discuss the pathogenic mechanisms leading to
increased aldosterone production and cell proliferation. Perspectives for clinical
management of patients and open questions to be addressed by future research
will be addressed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S8.3
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Bone marrow adipose tissue - A “novel” functionally active
fat depot
S9.1
Bone Marrow Adipose Tissue and bone, a bad romance
Stephanie Lucas
France.
Bone Marrow Adipose Tissue (BMAT) has only recently become an emerging
topic in both medical and basic research. As secretory cells found either packed or
scattered within the BM, these adipocytes are likely contributors to haematopoi-
esis- or bone- related diseases. Indeed, clinical studies have consistently reported
that BMAT amount is associated with bone loss in diverse types of osteoporosis
such  as  that  of  ageing,  post-menopause  and  anorexia  nervosa.  Since  BM
adipocytes and osteoblasts (the bone forming cells) arise from the resident
Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSC), the process of adipogenesis per se is often
viewed as a competitive process for osteoblastogenesis. Indeed, various endocrine
and local factors that usually alter osteoblastogenesis promote adipogenesis.
However, studies from other groups and ours qualify this view. Moreover, the
functional phenotype of BM adipocytes is also suggested to be a key determinant
in bone fragility. As shown by us and others, coculture of osteoblasts with
adipocytes compromises the phenotype, function or survival of osteoblasts.
Owing to the impact of the adipokines adiponectin and leptin on bone formation, a
few groups like ours have started to explore the capacity of BM adipocytes to
release factors involved in bone remodeling. Indeed, compared to classical
extramedullary  adipocytes;  primary  mature  BM  adipocytes  exhibit  low
expression levels of typical adipokines with high expression levels of anti-
osteoblastogenic factors (such as Wnt signaling inhibitors) and pro-osteoclasto-
genic factors (such as RANKL). These first findings obtained both in human
samplings and mouse models strengthen the detrimental involvement of BMAT
in bone remodeling.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S9.1
S9.2
Distinct metabolic role of bone marrow adipose tissue
Riku Kiviranta
Finland.
Bone marrow adipose tissue (BMAT) fills the majority of bone marrow space in
adult long bones. Despite its wide presence the functions of BMAT in normal
energy metabolism, bone turnover or in disease are largely unknown. Amount of
BMAT does increase with age, upon failure of hematopoietic bone marrow and in
anorexia nervosa but its amount also positively correlates with that of visceral fat.
Work in animal models has suggested that BMAT would share characteristics
with brown adipose tissue. Our research group is interested in the metabolic
activity  and  functions  of  BMAT  and  its  role  in  the  whole  body  energy
metabolism. To do this, we combine modern positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging and molecular biologic approaches.
In healthy subjects under fasting conditions BMAT does uptake glucose (18F-
fluorodeoxy glucose, FDG) similarly to subcutaneous and slightly less than
visceral adipose tissue. However, insulin stimulates the glucose uptake more than
in the other fat depots during hyperinsulinemic clamp. Interestingly, in morbidly
obese patients and especially in obese with type II diabetes, fasting BMAT
glucose uptake was higher than in controls but it was not stimulated by insulin
indicating that BMAT may become insulin resistant. In type II diabetic patients
BMAT insulin sensitivity could be improved by bariatric surgery-induced weight
loss or by rosiglitazone. We also found that cold stimulation does not activate
glucose metabolism in BMAT as it does in brown fat. Furthermore, we did not
observe any expression of brown fat marker genes in BMAT, which together with
PET data indicates that human long bone BMAT does resemble brown fat.
Instead, BMAT did show a distinct gene expression pattern different from
subcutaneous fat.
Taken together our data demonstrates that BMAT is metabolically active, insulin
sensitive  and  molecularly  distinct  fat  depot  that  likely  has  important  but
overlooked role in whole body energy metabolism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S9.2
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
S9.3
Development, endocrine functions, and metabolism of marrow
adipose tissues
Ormond A MacDougald
USA.
Marrow adipose tissue (MAT) accumulates in diverse clinical conditions but
remains poorly understood. We have observed region-specific variation in MAT
adipocyte development, regulation, size, lipid composition, gene expression and
genetic  determinants.  Functionally,  MAT  is  a  disproportionate  source  of
adiponectin.  Early  MAT  formation  in  mice  is  conserved,  whereas  later
development is strain dependent. Proximal, but not distal tibial, MAT is lost
with 21-day cold exposure. Rat MAT adipocytes from distal sites have an
increased  proportion  of  monounsaturated  fatty  acids  and  expression  of
Scd1/Scd2, Cebpa and Cebpb. Humans also have increased distal marrow fat
unsaturation. We define proximal ‘regulated’ MAT (rMAT) as single adipocytes
interspersed  with  active  haematopoiesis,  whereas  distal
‘constitutive’  MAT
(cMAT) has low haematopoiesis, contains larger adipocytes, develops earlier and
remains preserved upon systemic challenges. Loss of rMAT occurs in mice with
congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 4, whereas both rMAT and cMAT are
preserved in mice with congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 3. Consider-
ation of these MAT subpopulations may be important for future studies linking
MAT to bone biology, haematopoiesis and whole-body metabolism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S9.3
Late Breaking News Session
S10.1
Abstract unavailable.
S10.2
Abstract unavailable.
S10.3
Abstract unavailable.
New Developments in subclinical thyroid disease
S11.1
Thyroid function and aging: what can we learn from animal models?
Edward Visser
The Netherlands.
Since thyroid hormone is a key regulator of metabolism, changes in thyroid
hormone signaling have widespread effects. Thyroid state changes during aging
and  vice  versa  lifespan  is  affected  by  thyroid  state.  However,  underlying
mechanisms remain elusive. DNA damage importantly contributes to the process
of aging, as underscored by premature aging syndromes caused by defective
DNA repair.
In different mouse models of premature (DNA-repair deficient animals) and
normal aging, thyroid hormone signaling is attenuated in specific tissues. This is
associated with tissue-specific induction of the thyroid hormone-inactivating
deiodinase D3 and decrease of thyroid hormone-activating D1 activities. Also, the
T3-receptor beta appears important in mediating the T3-effects on aging. From
the current knowledge it can be speculated that tissue-specific attenuated thyroid
hormone signaling may contribute to the adaptive survival response during aging.
Future studies should reveal if decreasing thyroid hormone signaling improves
survival and if interventions that (further) suppress TH signaling extend lifespan.
Such studies on modulating thyroid hormone signaling may have important
implications for future therapeutic strategies to promote healthy aging.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S11.1
S11.2
Subclinical thyroid disease and clinical outcomes: lessons from large
individual participant-based analyses from the Thyroid Studies
Collaboration
Nicolas Rodondi
Switzerland.
To clarify the risks associated with subclinical thyroid dysfunction, we built in
2008 the Thyroid Studies Collaboration and collected into individual participant
data from 70 000 participants from 17 prospective cohorts. We first clarified the
risks of coronary heart disease, heart failure and mortality and assessed the
contribution of autoimmunity on the risks of cardiovascular diseases. We also
assessed the risk of stroke associated with subclinical thyroid dysfunction. Then,
we extended our study to assess the risk of fractures associated with subclinical
thyroid dysfunction, as well as the impact on bone mineral density. We also
explored what the most appropriate TSH levels in the euthyroid range, analysing
the risks of clinical outcomes within the normal range. Results of all these studies
will be presented at this session. We were able to clarify these risks, which could
not be adequately addressed in previous study-level meta-analyses or in single
cohorts performed in a more limited age group or without TSH stratification.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S11.2
S11.3
Subclinical hypothyroidism: when should we start treatment?
Leonidas Duntas
Greece.
Subclinical  hypothyroidism
(SCH),  defined  as  a  state  of  elevated  TSH
concentrations in the presence of normal free thyroxine and triiodothyronine
concentrations, can be mild or severe according to the extent of TSH increase.
The disease may be progressive or regressive, while the main cause of SCH is
chronic  autoimmune  thyroiditis.  However,  treatment  of  SCH  remains  con-
troversial, levothyroxine being the treatment of choice. It should be initiated in
pregnant women and in patients with goiter and high titers of thyroid antibodies.
High serum TSH concentrations (4.5-10 mU/l) are associated with increased
cardiovascular risk, especially in patients younger than 65 years old, in whom
treatment should be commenced. Once treatment is started, serum TSH needs to
be rechecked 2 months later and dosage adjustments made accordingly. The aim
is to reach a stable serum TSH in the lower half of the reference range (0.4-
2.5 mU/l). A low dose of thyroxine is required in patients with diagnosed
coronary artery disease. Recent data question any benefit of treatment in patients
older than 65 years, while treatment is usually not recommended in older (above
75 years) and very old (above 85 years) patients. It is advisable to implement a
wait-and-see  strategy  and to carefully follow  up patients. Nevertheless,  an
individual approach and tailored therapy is preferable as we should treat the
patient and not the disease. Overzealous therapy is strictly to be avoided.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S11.3
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Novel insights of disorders in pubertal timing
S12.1
Pubertal timing is changing: possible role for genetic, epigenetic and
environmental factors
Anders Juul
Denmark.
Puberty marks the transition period from childhood into adulthood with the
attainment of adult reproductive capacity. Timing of puberty exhibit marked
interindividual variation and depends on genetic and lifestyle factors. Onset of
puberty has started earlier during the last 20 years, which cannot be attributed to
genetic factors. Thus, lifestyle and environmental factors must be responsible for
these worrying trends.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S12.1
S12.2
Environmental modulation of the pubertal timing and
neuroendocrine regulation
Jean-Pierre Bourguignon
Belgium.
During the past decades, advancement in onset of pubertal timing has been
observed. Recent changes also include a trend towards delay in completion of
puberty, raising the question of environmental influences. Since pubertal timing
appears to be ‘programmed’ during foetal and neonatal life, factors such as
endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) could possibly interfere at those early
stages. As an example, the insecticide DDT could partly account for the increased
prevalence  of  sexual  precocity  among  children  adopted  from  developing
countries. Bisphenol A (BPA) is a ubiquitous EDC present in plastics and cans.
Human data suggested no association between BPA exposure and pubertal timing
or even delayed menarche whereas studies in rodents indicated possible early
onset of puberty.
EFSA has currently set the level of safe daily BPA exposure to 4 mg/kg per day.
Female rats were exposed to vehicle or BPA 25 ng/kg per day or 5 mg/kg per day
from postnatal day 1 to 5 or 15. After 15 days of exposure to 25 ng/kg per day of
BPA, vaginal opening (VO) was delayed following a delayed developmental
acceleration  of  pulsatile  gonadotropin-releasing  hormone
(GnRH)  secretion.
Inversely, exposure to BPA 5 mg/kg per day for 15 days resulted in early VO
following a premature acceleration of GnRH secretion. On PND 20, the mRNA
expression of hypothalamic genes involved in GABAA neurotransmission showed
opposing changes depending on the dose of BPA. The study of GnRH secretion
after BPA exposure in presence of GABAA receptor agonist/antagonist confirmed
that a very low BPA dose leads to delayed puberty  through an increased
GABAergic tone whereas a high BPA dose leads to early puberty through reduced
GABAergic tone. Thus, early postnatal exposure to BPA leads to opposing dose-
dependent effects on the neuroendocrine control of puberty in the female rat. A
very low and environmentally relevant dose of BPA delays maturation of the
neuroendocrine  control  of  puberty  through  alteration  of  GABAergic
neurotransmission.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S12.2
S12.3
Novel regulatory molecules of pubertal timing
Manuel Tena-Sempere
Finland.
Puberty is a crucial developmental event in the lifespan of any individual, when
reproductive competence is acquired and somatic and psychological maturation
completed.  As  key  maturational  process,  puberty  is  the  end-point  of  a
sophisticated developmental continuum, sensitive to numerous modifiers, and is
subjected to precise regulatory networks, in which central and peripheral signals,
as well as external cues, cooperate for the precise control of pubertal timing. In
this presentation, we will summarize recent developments in our knowledge of
the central mechanisms responsible for the activation of the reproductive axis at
puberty, with special emphasis on the role of recently identified neuropeptide
systems (epitomized by kisspeptins and neurokinin B), and their interaction with
other central transmitters and metabolic hormones. In addition, we will present
recent data concerning novel molecular regulators of puberty, including central
epigenetic and microRNA regulatory pathways, as well as cellular energy sensors,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
which operating at the hypothalamus appear to play a fundamental function in the
precise control of puberty and its coupling with the body energy/metabolic status.
All in all, we intend to provide an integral view of the state-of-the-art in this
exciting  area  of  neuroendocrinology,  which  will
(hopefully)  enhance  the
understanding of the physiology of puberty, as well as of the pathophysiological
basis of the alterations of pubertal timing and their impact on other bodily
systems.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S12.3
Management of Cushing’s syndrome
S13.1
New developments in the medical treatment of Cushing’s disease
Richard Feelders
The Netherlands.
Cushing’s disease (CD), caused by a corticotroph pituitary adenoma, is associated
with multi-system morbidity and when untreated or suboptimally treated with an
increased  mortality.  Transsphenoidal  adenomectomy  is  the  first  choice  of
treatment for CD. Medical treatment is an option in patients in whom surgery
is not successful or not feasible. Medical therapy for CD can be classified into
pituitary-directed  drugs,  adrenal-blocking  drugs  and  glucocorticoid  receptor
antagonists. Dopamine and somatostatin receptors have been identified as targets
for pituitary-directed drug therapy. The majority of ACTH-secreting pituitary
adenomas express the dopamine receptor subtype-2 (DA2) and somatostatin
receptor  subtype-5.  The  DA2
agonist  cabergoline  can  normalize  cortisol
production in G30% of patients. Pasireotide, a universal somatostatin analog
with high affinity for sst5, normalizes cortisol production in G25% of patients. A
study with longacting pasireotide in CD is underway. Combined targeting of DA2
and sst5 with cabergoline and pasireotide, which may have synergistic effects,
showed promising results. Potential new  therapeutic  targets  in corticotroph
adenomas include cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK), epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and heat shock protein 90 (HSP90). CDK are upregulated in
corticotroph adenomas and can promote cell growth via deregulation of the cell
cycle. EGFR signaling, in particular in adenomas with somatic mutations in the
USP8 gene,  is associated  with POMC  expression  and  cell  proliferation.
Overexpression of HSP90 contributes to glucocorticoid resistance of corticotroph
adenomas.  Preclinical  studies  on  targeting  CDK,  EGFR  and  HSP90
with
roscovitine,  gefitinib  and  silibinin  respectively  showed  promising  results.
Osilodrostat  and  levoketoconazole  are  recently  developed  inhibitors  of
steroidogenesis  and  are  currently  under  investigation  in  multicenter  trials.
Mifepristone is the only available glucocorticoid receptor antagonist and was
recently approved in the USA for treatment of hyperglycemia related to CD.
Medical therapy for CD should be tailor-made and future studies should explore
the optimal order and combination of medical treatment modalities.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S13.1
S13.2
Abstract unavailable.
S13.3
Rethinking familial adrenal Cushing’s
Maya Lodish
USA.
Primary adrenal Cushing syndrome is the result of cortisol hypersecretion mainly
by adenomas and, rarely, by bilateral micronodular or macronodular adrenocor-
tical hyperplasia. cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) signaling is the major
activator  of  cortisol  secretion  in  the  adrenal  cortex.  Many  adenomas  and
hyperplasias associated with primary hypercortisolism carry somatic or germline
mutations of genes that constitute part of the cAMP-PKA pathway. We will
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
discuss Cushing syndrome and its linkage to dysregulated cAMP-PKA signaling,
with a focus on genetic findings in the past few years. In addition, we present the
finding of germline inactivating mutations in ARMC5 that are associated with
primary  bilateral macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia. This finding has
implications for genetic counseling of affected patients; hitherto, most patients
with this form of adrenal hyperplasia and Cushing syndrome were thought to have
a sporadic and not a familial disorder. Other genetic syndromes including
Li-Fraumeni, Beckwith Widemann, and Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 also
are  associated  with  familial  Adrenal  Cushing’s.  In  adrenal  adenomas  and
PBMAH, a spectrum of tumour growth exists as a result of variable genetic
defects. Many of the genetic factors that underlie the development of cortisol-
producing  lesions  of  the  adrenal  cortex  have  been  identified.  If  germline
mutations of the Carney complex gene PRKAR1A are present, patients develop
PPNAD  and  cortisol  hypersecretion  in  adolescence  or  early  adulthood.  If
alterations of the cAMP-PKA pathway occur at the somatic level, cortisol-
secreting adenomas form, at any age. However, active research is still attempting
to understand why cAMP activation at different points in the pathway yields
different phenotypes. Advances in knowledge in the past few years have identified
novel treatment targets for cortisol excess in Cushing syndrome, and highlight the
importance of genetic testing in this condition.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S13.3
Hot topics on vitamin D
S14.1
Vitamin D and immunology
Chantal Mathieu
Belgium.
In recent years, great attention has been given to the pleiotropic effect of vitamin
D, a vitamin well known from its role in bone and calcium homeostasis. Also in
the immune system, modulating effects by vitamin D have been described.
Receptors for vitamin D are present in cells throughout the immune system and a
central role for the antigen presenting dendritic cell and the macrophage in the
effect of vitamin D in the immune system is described. The latter cells not only
carry receptors,  but also contain the machinery to produce themselves the
activated form of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. These data suggest a
physiological  role  for  vitamin  D  as  an  immune  modulator.  Epidemiology
confirms this possible role, indicating correlations between vitamin D deficiency
and adverse immune outcomes (more infections, more autoimmune diseases).
Animal models confirm this detrimental effect of vitamin D deficiency on
immune function and even point towards the possibility of exploiting these effects
of vitamin D in a pharmacological way, using analogues of vitamin D as immune
modulators or treating immune cells ex vivo. Clinical intervention studies using
vitamin  D  or  its  activated  form,
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin  D3,  have  yielded
confusing results. The place for vitamin D in a healthy immune system and in
disease will be discussed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S14.1
S14.2
Vitamin D and pregnancy - outcomes of mother and child
Christel Lamberg-Allardt
Finland.
Vitamin D deficiency is a global problem in many populations, but is a distinct
problem for some groups e.g. pregnant women. A sufficient vitamin D status
during pregnancy is important both for the mother, for the foetus and the newborn
child. The serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration (25OH)D of the infant at
birth correlates with the maternal vitamin D status during pregnancy. Vitamin D
metabolism is altered during pregnancy, but the regulation and impact is unclear,
e.g. the maternal serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D) concentration is
increased. Moreover, the placenta has the ability to produce 1,25(OH)2D. A
number of various health outcomes in the mother and the offspring have been
linked to maternal vitamin D insufficiency during pregnancy. A low initial
vitamin D status in the newborn predisposes to rickets. Research focus has been
set on the relationship of vitamin D status during pregnancy and a number of
adverse nonskeletal outcomes such as preeclampsia in the mother, preterm birth
and growth related outcomes in the child. Vitamin D insufficiency in pregnancy
has been associated with increased risk for e.g. gestational diabetes mellitus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S14.2
S14.3
CYP24A1 mutations and human disease
Glenville Jones
Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia (IIH) constitutes a broad group of diseases
with a common outcome namely, hypercalcemia. It is now recognized that
mutations of the vitamin D catabolic cytochrome P450, CYP24A1 represent one
of the major causes of IIH. Patients often present in neonatal life with transient
hypercalcemia, but adults with hypercalciuria, renal stones & nephrocalcinosis
also appear with CYP24A1 defects. Recently, there have been reports that
pregnant females with IIH can suffer hypercalcemic episodes during pregnancy,
presumably due to increased synthesis of 1,25-(OH)2D3 by the placenta, that abate
after pregnancy. Estimates of the frequency of CYP24A1 gene mutations suggest
1:100 carriers and a 1:40 000 incidence of IIH. While genetic analysis of the
CYP24A1 locus represents the definitive diagnosis of this form of IIH, we have
devised a rapid, screening test for detecting IIH patients with two defective
CYP24A1  mutations.  It  consists  of  simultaneously  measuring  vitamin  D
metabolites: 25-OH-D3  and 24,25-(OH)2D3  in serum by LC-MS/MS and then
expressing the results as a 25-OH-D3:24,25-(OH)2D3  ratio. Heterozygotes and
normal individuals have ratios between 5-25 while IIH patients have ratios O80.
Refinements of this approach have further resolved IIH patients from individuals
with a high ratio due to vitamin D deficiency and patients with chronic kidney
disease on dialysis. Loss-of-function CYP24A1 mutations cause hypersensitivity
to dietary vitamin D, so reduction of dietary vitamin D or exposure to UV light is
recommended. Further insights into the causes of hypercalcemic episodes in IIH
should come from studies of the CYP24A1-null mouse. Reintroduction of a BAC
clone representing the full wild-type human or mouse CYP24A1 gene into the
CYP24A1 null mouse restores normocalcemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S14.3
In the rhythm of EYES: Let’ dance!
S15.1
The Microbiome Waltz - cross-regulation of rhythmic oscillations at the
host-microbiota interface
Christoph Thaiss
Israel.
All domains of life feature diverse molecular clock machineries that synchronize
physiological  processes  to  diurnal  environmental  fluctuations.  However,  no
mechanisms are known to cross-regulate prokaryotic and eukaryotic circadian
rhythms  in  multi-kingdom  ecosystems.  We  discovered  that  the  intestinal
microbiota, in both mice and humans, exhibits diurnal oscillations, leading to
time-specific compositional and functional profiles over the course of a day. The
active phase of the host is dominated by microbial energy harvest, DNA repair,
and  cell  growth,  while  detoxification  and  environmental  sensing  pathways
dominate during the resting phase. These rhythmic fluctuations are governed by
the circadian clock of the host, and ablation of host molecular clock components
or induction of jet lag leads to loss of microbiota diurnal fluctuations and
dysbiosis. Mechanistically, the host circadian clock controls feeding rhythms,
which in turn drive diurnal microbiota oscillations. Scheduled feeding allows for
phase reversal of microbiota diurnal activity and rescues loss of microbiota
rhythms in mice deficient in the circadian clock.
Disruption of the circadian clock is a hallmark of the modern life style and has
been associated with enhanced susceptibility to metabolic disease. We found that
jet lag-induced dysbiosis in both mice and humans promotes glucose intolerance
and obesity that are transferrable to germ-free mice upon fecal transplantation.
Microbiota  from  jet-lagged  humans  or  mice  causes  manifestations  of  the
metabolic syndrome in germ-free recipients, while microbiota after recovery from
jet lag does not.
Together, these findings provide evidence of coordinated meta-organism diurnal
rhythmicity  and  offer  a  microbiome-dependent  mechanism  for  common
metabolic disturbances in humans with aberrant circadian rhythms, such as
those documented in shift workers and frequent flyers.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S15.1
S15.2
Jive up your judgement! Density is not the destiny - the lessons from
vertebral morphometry and bone turnover in acromegaly
Marko Stojanovic
Serbia.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Skeleton is an emerging target for systemic complications in acromegaly. The
GH/IGF-1 excess is believed to cause an increased bone turnover and negative
calcium balance. Observations on bone mineral density (BMD) in acromegalic
patients are inconsistent, possibly in relation to skeletal site and method of BMD
measurement or gonadal status. Reports on skeletal fragility are also conflicting
but it is predominantly believed that an increase of vertebral fractures (VFs) risk
is  present  in  acromegaly.  This  results  from  deterioration  of  structural  and
biomechanical  properties  of  bone,  despite  preserved  BMD.  VFs  are  often
clinically silent yet associated with decreased survival and increased risk for
subsequent vertebral and nonvertebral fractures. Since VFs are among the most
invalidating complications of acromegaly, dedicated investigation of bone health
is recommend. In patients with acromegaly, two dimensional BMD, measured by
dual  X-ray  absorptiometry
(DXA)  is  insufficient  predictor  of fracture  risk.
Osteoarthritic complications in acromegalics and excess cortical bone often cause
BMD overestimation. Bone size enlargement potentially causes BMD under-
estimation. Vertebral morphometry (VFA) provides a useful tool for time and cost
effective and low radiation screening for VFs. Comprehensive evaluation and
monitoring of bone health is mandatory at diagnosis, through follow-up and even
after successful treatment. Prevalence and progression of VFs are expected even
after biochemical control of acromegaly. Duration of the disease is a crucial
factor.  Assessment  of  bone  remodeling,  through  bone  turnover  markers  is
important throughout long term management of acromegaly. Elevated bone
turnover markers are expected in the active disease. In cured and controlled
patients monitoring of bone markers is needed to detect possible low-turnover
osteoporosis, particularly in hypogonadal patients, warranting additional DXA
BMD follow-up. Known skeletal health risk in acromegaly requires commitment
to investigate and treat additional factors affecting bone in these patients, such as
untreated hypogonadism, overreplaced hypocortisolism or concomitant diabetes
mellitus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S15.2
S15.3
Chemokine receptor CXCR4 - important role in human adrenal
physiology and tumour disease?
Carmina Teresa Fub
Introduction
Chemokines are small secreted molecules that promote cell survival, proliferation
and directional guidance of migrating cells in normal physiology and tumour
pathophysiology. We have recently observed high CXCR4 mRNA expression
both in normal human adrenals and in adrenocortical carcinomas. Furthermore, a
PET tracer for selective molecular imaging of CXCR4-expression has recently
been established.
Objective
To further investigate CXCR4 protein expression in the normal adrenal cortex and
in benign adrenocortical tumours and to estimate its potential as a target for
molecular imaging in primary hyperaldosteronism (PA).
Methods
CXCR4-expression was evaluated by quantitative PCR and by immunohisto-
chemistry  in  paraffin-embedded  sections  of
2
normal  adrenals
(NA),
117
aldosterone producing adenomas (APA), 49 non-functioning adenomas (NFA),
52 cortisol producing adenomas (CPA). In addition, the expression of its ligand
CXCL12 (SDF1), aldosterone synthase and 11-beta-hydroxylase was analyzed
using specific antibodies. Furthermore, we performed in vitro binding studies of
[68Ga]Pentixafor to frozen tumor tissue of APAs and NAs.
Results
In normal adrenals, strongest CXCR4 staining was found in the outer part of the
adrenal cortex covering the CYP11B2 positive zona glomerulosa (ZG) and the
outer part of the zona fasciculata while its ligand CXCL12 was particularly
expressed in the inner cortical zone. Both qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry
further indicated high CXCR4 expression in most APAs which was significantly
higher especially compared NFAs (PZ0.01). [68Ga]Pentixafor exhibited strong
binding to kryosections of APAs.
Conclusion
The expression pattern of CXCR4 and CXCL12 in normal adrenals suggests that
it may play a physiological role in ultrastructural organization of the adrenal
cortex. Because of the high expression in APAs compared to CPAs and NFAs and
the strong binding of [68Ga]Pentixafor to APAs, CXCR4 may be a suitable target
for molecular imaging of APAs in PA.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S15.3
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Thyroid nodules
S16.1
Abstract unavailable.
S16.2
Pediatric thyroid nodules
Marianna Rachmiel
In a modern world of ultrasound (US) technology, thyroid nodules are diagnosed
5-10 times more frequently than used to be the case by palpation. Thus, the
question of work-up and management is of major importance, especially in
asymptomatic incidental findings. This question is very pertinent in pediatric
cases, when imaging is performed for non-thyroid indications.
In the adult population, thyroid nodules are detected by US in 19 to 67% of the
population. In the adolescents and young adult population, estimates from US
examination suggest that 13%, and among young children, up to 5%, have thyroid
nodules.
Although thyroid nodules are less common in children, it is of major concern that
they are almost five-fold more likely to be malignant in children than in adults
(26.4% vs. approximately 5%).
We must always keep in mind that a child and even an adolescent, is not simply a
miniature adult, and thus approach and management are not identical.
The aim of this review is to discuss the major issues in evaluating and treating
thyroid nodules in children and adolescents, and to compare pediatric evaluation
and treatment with that of the adult population with thyroid nodules.
The following questions will be discussed: Do we need routine surveillance to
detect thyroid nodules as early as possible in high-risk patients? Who are high risk
pediatric patients? Do all nodules need FNA or are there clinical and sonographic
features that will help to identify those in need of FNA? If the FNA appears
benign, is this sufficient to allow life-long follow up without surgical removal?
What if we incorrectly diagnose a thyroid cancer as a benign lesion: Will that
negatively impact long-term survival? Do benign thyroid nodules in children
become or predispose to malignant lesions later in life? Does size count? How
should apparently benign lesion be treated in children?
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S16.2
S16.3
Abstract unavailable.
Genetics and epigenetics of testicular failure
S17.1
Aberrations on the X-chromosome as cause of male infertility
Frank Tuttelmann
Germany.
Infertility affects
10-15% of couples and the causes of couple infertility are
equally attributed to male and female (co-)factors. Male infertility is a genetically
and clinically highly heterogeneous disease with a multitude of up to 1,500 genes
supposedly involved in spermatogenesis. Thus, unravelling the underlying causes
and the pathophysiology is challenging and candidate gene approaches, e.g.
picking one or several genes known to cause infertility in mice, did not identify
novel genetic causes of infertility in men.
The sex chromosomes are enriched for genes required for fertility and the
Y-chromosomal AZF-microdeletions have been known for a long time to cause
azoo- or severe oligozoospermia. However, X-chromosomal microdeletions and
mutations in X-linked genes have only been analysed recently by utilising novel
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
methods of genome-wide analyses. These have greatly expanded the toolbox for
genetic studies and broadened the scope beyond single gene analyses. The power
of  such  approaches  is  demonstrated  by  genome-wide  array-Comparative
Genomic Hybridisation (array-CGH) in groups of clinically well-characterised
oligo- and azoospermic men. We were the first to report an excess of Copy
Number Variations (CNVs) in infertile males especially on the sex-chromosomes.
X-linked CNVs have also been proposed as recurrent cause for male infertility by
others - comparable to the Y-chromosomal AZF-deletions.
Very recently, by using high-resolution array-CGH, we identified exon-deletions
and nucleotide mutations in TEX11 as the first common X-linked cause for
meiotic arrest in about 15% of men with this phenotype. This breakthrough relied
on phenotyping by testicular histology allowing specific selection of study
subjects. Hemizygous mutations in TEX11 were confirmed as an important cause
for meiotic arrest already in another study.
Taken together, comprehensive screening for small deletions and sequencing of
X-chromosomal genes will likely result in fast identification of novel genetic
causes for male infertility.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S17.1
S17.2
Gene variants modulating testicular function
Maris Laan
Determinants of male reproductive system are highly complex. The palette of
genetic  variants  modulating  testicular  function  and  fertility  potential,  are
expected to be heterogenous. Our team has exploited complimentary study
designs to provide novel insights and robust data on the contribution of genetic
variation to testicular physiology and risk to impaired fertility in men. Firstly, I
discuss our discovery studies utilizing the candidate gene approach and focusing
on gonadotropin FSH  and  LH beta  encoding genes  FSHB  and LHB.  The
discovered FSHB -211G/T (rs10835638) represents so far the only identified
genetic variant with direct major effect on male serum FSH levels. Our and other
groups  have  suggested  its  pharmacogenetic  potential  to  identify  the  best
responders to male FSH treatment. Our resequencing data of the LHB gene
enables to assess the impact of previously suggested and novel variants on male
reproductive  physiology.  Secondly,  I  address  the  robustness  of  genetic
associations  from  published  GWA  studies  for  circulating  testosterone  and
SHBG, and their contribution to testicular and sperm parameters. Thirdly, I talk
about our ongoing screen for genomic structural variants (copy number variants,
CNVs) in male idiopathic infertility. CNVs involving genes critical for the
regulation of spermatogenesis are promising candidates responsible for strong or
causative genetic effects. The majority of studies investigating the role of CNVs
in male infertility have been focused on sex chromosomes. Our team aimed at
characterisation of the genome-wide load and profile of CNVs among men with
idiopathic infertility. Based on the study data, we propose an overall altered
autosomal CNV profile as a considerable risk factor leading to male infertility and
report  novel  genomic  hotspots  and  recurrent  CNVs  as  potential  causes  of
impaired spermatogenesis. In perspective, uncovering the genetic contribution to
testicular
(mal)function is expected to lead to improved diagnostics, optimal
treatment and perspective pharmacogenetic approaches in andrology clinics.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S17.2
S17.3
SEMA3A and SEMA3E: from mice to Kallmann syndrome
Anna Cariboni
Italy.
Gonadotropin  releasing  hormone  neurons  are  a  small  group  of  scattered
hypothalamic neuroendocrine cells that control reproductive functions in all
mammals and many vertebrates.
Despite their position in the adult hypothalamus, during development they
originate in the nasal placode and migrate along the vomeronasal nerve to reach
the forebrain and attain their final position in the hypothalamus. Failure of GnRH
neurons to migrate lead to Kallmann Syndrome, a genetic disorder characterised
by absent/delayed puberty and anosmia. The genes underlying KS are largely
unknown but the combination of genetically modified mouse models with exome
sequencing may help to identify the unknown genes.
We have previously demonstrated that class 3 semaphorin (SEMA) 3A controls
the positioning of the vomeronasal nerve and therefore the migration of GnRH
neurons via Neuropilin (NRP1-2) receptors (Cariboni et al. Hum Mol Gen 2011).
Mice lacking SEMA3A display typical KS features including hypogonadism.
Predicted by our findings on mouse models, mutations of the SEMA3A gene have
been subsequently identified in patients with KS (Hanchate et al. PLOS Genet
2012).
In the search for additional SEMA3-mediated signalling pathways involved in
this developmental process we found that PLEXIND1, which is the SEMA3E
receptor, is expressed by GnRH neurons with a pattern of expression that is
temporally complementary to NRP1. Specifically, we found that in the nasal
compartment GnRH neurons express high levels of NRP1 and low levels of
PLEXIND1, whereas once projecting into the forebrain they stop expressing
NRP1 and express very of high levels PLXND1. Accordingly mice lacking
PLXND1 show a reduction in the total number of GnRH neurons, and an
increased number of caspase-positive cells in the forebrain in correspondence of
GnRH neurons projecting to the medial preoptic area. This results in decreased
size of their gonads and reduced fertility, both of mice lacking PlexinD1 or its
SEMA3E ligand.
Predicted by our findings on mouse models, we found mutations in two siblings
affected  by  KS  in  the  SEMA3E  gene,  strongly  supporting  a  role  of
SEMA3E/PlexinD1 genetic pathway in the aethiopathogenesis of KS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S17.3
S18.1
Abstract unavailable.
S18.2
Current developments in classification of neuroendocrine neoplasia
Aurel Perren
Switzerland.
According to the current WHO classification neuroendocrine neoplasias (NEN)
are classified according to differentiation into well differentiated neuroendocrine
tumors (NET) and poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas (NEC). NEN
are classified in addition to organ of origin and grade. More recent molecular data
confirms this approach as the identified mutation spectrum differs according to
differentiation and organ of origin. However, NEN might be more heterogeneous:
Expression data of a large series of pancreatic NET indicates that biologically
meaningful subgroups can be defined as in other malignant neoplasms, the
clinical role regarding prognosis and prediction to therapy response of such a
classification will need to be examined.
More recently, a subset of highly proliferative G3 NEN were described to differ
morphologically and biologically from NEC G3 and are best designated as well
differentiated NET G3. Morphology is able to identify a subset of these tumors
and further studies will show if molecular classifications will be able to help.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S18.2
S18.3
Abstract unavailable.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Brown adipose tissue - a burning issue
(Endorsed by Endocrine Connections)
S19.1
The role of brown and brite fat in energy balance regulation
Martin Klingenspor
Germany.
Three major observations triggered a revitalized interest in the role of brown fat in
energy balance and the metabolic benefits of this thermogenic tissue in humans.
Firstly, progenitors of brown adipocytes derive from the muscle lineage whereas
recruitable brown-like adipocytes in white fat, termed brite (brown-in-white), can
be  of  other  developmental  origin.  Secondly,  healthy  adult  humans  have
metabolically powerful brown/brite fat that is activated by acute cold exposure,
b3-adrenergic receptor agonist treatment, or after ingestion of a meal. Thirdly,
cold-induced metabolic activity of brown/brite fat in humans is negatively
associated with body mass index and age, and is recruitable by cold-acclimation.
Based on these findings human brown/brite fat has been reconsidered as a target
for pharmacological or nutritional interventions in obese and diabetic subjects.
The beneficial effects of brown/brite fat are attributed to the high capacity of
brown/brite adipocytes to dissipate heat. Thermogenic capacity in these cells is
determined by high lipolytic capacity, extraordinary mitochondrial density and
expression of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1). Located in the inner mitochondrial
membrane, UCP1 is constitutively inactive, but upon lipolytic release of fatty
acids  dissipates  proton-motive  force  as  heat  thereby  causing  extraordinary
mitochondrial respiration rates. Enormous efforts are currently undertaken to
identify treatments that stimulate the formation and maintenance of thermogenic
brown/brite  adipocytes,  and  activate  UCP1
in  these  cells.  Release  of
noradrenaline  from  sympathetic  varicosities  is  the  physiological  trigger  of
UCP1 activation in brown/brite fat, but also de novo recruitment of thermogenic
capacity.  However,  sympathomimetics  selectively  activating  brown/brite  fat
thermogenesis without detrimental cardiovascular side-effects are currently not
available. Therefore, the pros and cons for a significant role of brown/brite fat in
human energy balance regulation and the evidence for non-adrenergic activators
of brown fat thermogenesis will be critically addressed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S19.1
S19.2
Abstract unavailable.
S19.3
Role of brown adipose tissue activation in lipid metabolism and
cardiometabolic health
Patrick C Rensen
The Netherlands.
Activated brown adipose tissue (BAT) combusts high amounts of intracellular
lipids into heat. In the past few years, we have investigated the consequences of
BAT activation for lipid metabolism and cardiometabolic health. Initially, we
showed that South Asians, a population characterized by dyslipidemia and prone
to  develop  type
2 diabetes  and  cardiovascular  disease  compared  to  white
Caucasians, have low BAT activity correlating with low energy expenditure
(Lancet Diab Endocrinol 2014). In search for pharmacological strategies to
activate BAT, we then set out to understand the physiology of BAT. Using
preclinical models we elucidated that BAT activation enhances selective uptake
of  lipoprotein-triglyceride-derived  fatty  acids  by  BAT  thereby  generating
lipoprotein remnants that are taken up by the liver (J Lipid Res 2015; Circ Res
2016). Next, we discovered novel pharmacological targets that modulate BAT
activity with respect to uptake of plasma triglyceride-derived fatty acids, both
directly (e.g. AMPK, BMP7R, CB1R, USF-1) and via neural control (e.g. MC4R,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GLP-1R, ADRB3) and showed that BAT activation improves dyslipidemia and
hyperglycemia and reduces type 2 diabetes and atherosclerosis (e.g. FASEB J
2014; Diabetes 2014; Nat Commun 2015; Sci Transl Med 2016). Recently, we
also demonstrated that disruption of the central biological clock predisposes to
adiposity by reduced sympathetic outflow to BAT (PNAS USA 2015) and we
identified a strong circadian rhythm in the uptake of plasma lipids by BAT,
explaining a circadian rhythm in postprandial lipid responses as well as plasma
lipid levels (unpublished). Based on these collective data, we recently started
(timed) human intervention studies in prediabetic individuals from South Asian
vs white Caucasians origin aimed to activate BAT activity and to improve
cardiometabolic health.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S19.3
Hitchhiker’s guide to the microsmos of GPCRs
S20.1
Location, location, location: spatial programming of GPCR signalling
Aylin Hanyaloglu
An archetypal view of GPCR signalling depicts cell surface localized receptors
activating  specific  heterotrimeric  G-protein  signal  pathways,  which  in  turn
converge on to common downstream pathways. How such signals are translated
into the highly diverse cellular and physiological responses that are controlled by
this superfamily of receptors has been a long-standing biological question. This
question has driven our more current understanding of the complexity of these
receptor-signalling  systems,  yet  how  such  functional  pleiotropy  in  GPCR
signalling is decoded to specific downstream cellular responses is unknown.
One mechanism that regulates both signal specificity and diversity is membrane
trafficking, a system deeply integrated with cell signalling. Our recent studies with
the gonadotropin hormone receptors, provides an unprecedented view of how
GPCR activity can be regulated at a spatial level. We have demonstrated that
specificity in signalling of distinct internalized GPCRs can be achieved by
regulated  endosomal  targeting  of  receptors  upstream  of  the  classic  early
endosome, a compartment we term the very early endosome (VEE). Importantly,
GPCR activation of cAMP-PKA signalling drives its own post-endocytic sorting
via a unique VEE recycling mechanism, and spatially restricts endosomal cAMP
and  MAPK  signalling.  Spatial  encoding  of  receptor  signalling  provides  a
mechanism for reprogramming GPCR activity by altering receptor location across
distinct endosomes to create highly regulated and distinct signalling profiles. Such
mechanisms  may  also  be  altered  pathophysiologically  and  that  perturbed
gonadotropin-activity in recurrent miscarriage may be due to altered spatial
control of GPCR signalling.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S20.1
S20.2
Tethered Agonism: a common activation mechanism of glycoprotein
hormone receptors
Torsten Schoneberg
Germany.
Glycoprotein hormone receptors (GPHRs) have been cloned about 25 years ago
and,  since  then,  the  glycoprotein  hormones  TSH,  LH/hCG  and  FSH  are
considered as the agonists for their respective receptors. Additionally to TSH,
the TSH receptor for example, can be activated by mutations and autoantibodies
causing hyperthyroidism and Graves’ disease, respectively. The mode, how the
receptors integrate the activating actions of glycoprotein hormones, mutations
and autoantibodies to trigger receptor’s signal transduction, is a still unsolved
mystery. We recently showed that a short peptide sequence in the C-terminal part
of the extracellular N terminus functions as a tethered agonist for all glycoprotein
hormone receptors in vitro and in vivo. Our data support a scenario where, upon
structural changes within the ectodomain due to extracellular ligand binding, this
intramolecular  ligand  most  probably  isomerizes  and  activates  the
7-transmembrane helix domain triggering G-protein activation. The identification
of the internal agonist sequence for GPHRs now allows for characterization of its
agonist binding pocket followed by rational ligand design. Such ligands could be
therapeutically useful for blocking TSHR activation due to autoantibodies in
Graves’ disease and activating mutations in GPHRs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S20.2
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
S20.3
Innovative approaches for the control of class C GPCRs activity
Jean-Phillippe Pin
France.
G protein-coupled receptors play key roles in cell-cell communication processes,
and, not surprisingly, are the main targets for therapeutic drugs. Among these,
those of the class C are the receptors for neurotransmitters, glutamate and GABA
(mGlu and GABABRs), for the umami and sweet taste compounds (T1Rs), and for
calcium and basic amino acids (CaSR and GPRC6a). Class C GPCRs are much
more complex proteins than the class A and B GPCRs. They are made of two
subunits covalently linked by a disulfide bridge, each being composed of a venus
flytrap domain (VFT) where agonists bind, connected via a cystein-rich domain to
a heptahelical membrane domain responsible for G protein activation. Such a
large protein complex undergoes major conformational changes upon ligand
binding in the VFT, leading to the activation of one 7TM domain.
During this presentation, I will summarize our view of the activation mechanism
of these receptors, and illustrate the multiple possibilities offered to develop
innovative molecules able to specifically regulate them. These include orthosteric
as  well  as  allosteric  compounds  acting  within  the
7TM.  Recently,  photo-
switchable compounds have been developed that allow to control receptor activity
where and when needed. Using such compounds identified for mGluRs, we
demonstrated that it is possible to perfectly control the response to pain in living
animals.
The important conformational changes accompanying class C receptor activation
offers the possibilities to develop antibodies that can regulate their activity. We
identified llama single chain antibodies (nanobodies) that act as positive allosteric
modulators of mGlu2 subtype. These nanobodies control mGlu2 activity in brain
slices, enhancing the presynaptic inhibitory effect of mGlu2 agonists. In addition,
injection of these nanobodies in the hippocampal area enhance to inhibitory
action of mGlu2 agonists of the context fear memory.
These findings illustrate the numerous possibilities offered by the class C GPCR
complex structure to modulate their activity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S20.3
An update on hyperparathyroidism
S21.1
Primary hyperparathyroidism: what is new?
Camilla Schalin-Jantti
Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is a common endocrine disorder, with a
prevalence of 1-4 per 1000, that increases to 21 per 1000 in age groups 55-75
years. PHPT may be cured in only one way: by surgical excision of the abnormal
parathyroid tissue, which in w85% of patients is due to a parathyroid adenoma.
Double adenomas are found in w4% of cases and parathyroid carcinoma in 1%.
There  is  consensus  that  patients  with  markedly  increased  serum  calcium
concentrations, symptomatic kidney stones and osteoporosis should undergo
surgery. In 5-10% of cases, PHPT is part of a genetic syndrome, such as multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1 or 2, hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome (HPT-
JT), familial isolated hyperparathyroidism
(FIHP), or familial hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia (FHH).
To date, exciting topics within PHPT include the evaluation of neurocognitive
symptoms and health-related quality of life
(HRQoL). Such symptoms are
commonly reported in PHPT, and there is a need for a sensitive tool applicable for
the assessment of such symptoms in the out-patient clinic. The value of symptoms
as prognostic factors regarding who benefits from surgery has so far been poorly
studied. Whether HRQoL in PHPT improves after surgery is a matter of debate.
I will discuss some of the studies available on HRQoL in PHPT, and the outcome
of surgery on HRQoL.
An increasing amount of genetic defects underlying PHPT have been identified
over the years, and I will go through some of the recent findings in HPT-JT, FIHP,
and familial hypocalcuric hypercalcemia (FHH).
Last but not least, the incidence of parathyroid carcinoma seems to be increasing
world-wide. I will shortly review this topic, and also share some novel data from
the Finnish Parathyroid Carcinoma Cohort with you.
Other topics discussed in this session include the relationship between primary
hyperparathyroidism,  hypertension  and  hyperaldosteronism,  and  novel  data
regards available preoperative imaging techniques in PHPT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S21.1
S21.2
Hyperparathyroidism, hypertension and hyperaldosteronism
Evelyn Asbach
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most frequent cause of endocrine arterial
hypertension. PA is known to cause a higher cardiovascular morbidity, which is
reduced  by  specific  therapy  of  PA.  Numerous  studies  suggest  that  miner-
alocorticoid  excess  may  influence  mineral  homeostasis.  On  the  other  side,
parathyroid hormone excess has been linked to cardiovascular disease. Increasing
evidence supports a bidirectional interaction between aldosterone and PTH which
might lead to a higher cardiovascular risk.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S21.2
S21.3
What is new in imaging and surgery for hyperparathyroidism
Marko Hocevar
During last few decades primary hyperparathyroidism (PHP) evolved from the
disease of ‘bones, moans, stones and groans’ to a disorder that is most commonly
asymptomatic and incidentally diagnosed with increasing biochemical screening.
At the same time different localization studies of the abnormal parathyroid
gland(s) emerged. Because PHP is caused in more than 85% of patients with a
single gland adenoma which can be reliably localized preoperatively, there has
been a major paradigm shift in the management of PHT. The traditional approach
to parathyroid surgery, consisted of bilateral neck exploration with the cure rates
around 95%, was replaced by a more focused minimally invasive approach based
on pre-operative localization and intraoperative parathyroid hormone testing
(ioPTH). Minimally invasive approach is critically dependent on the preoperative
localization studies and their imperfection represents its major limitation.
Ultrasound is the most frequently used anatomic imaging modality with the
lowest cost and reported sensitivity of 70% to 100% for detecting enlarged
parathyroid glands. It is highly operator-dependent and in the presence of thyroid
gland abnormalities its sensitivity decreases.
Sestamibi scanning is the most frequently used functional imaging modality with
reported sensitivity of 54-100% for identifying single gland adenoma. Addition
of  single  photon  emission  computed  tomography  can  further  improve  the
sensitivity.
Recently our group reported a study of18F-fluorocholine PET/CT as a promising,
effective imaging method for localization of hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue
with higher sensitivity than sestamibi scanning.
Use of ioPTH is a highly effective intraoperative adjunct telling a surgeon when to
conclude the operation during focused minimally invasive parathyroidectomy.
However, the benefit of ioPTH may be marginal in the presence of a highly
sensitive preoperative localization study and patients with a single adenoma can
safely undergo a focused parathyroidectomy without ioPTH testing.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S21.3
New mechanisms to induce and protect from
ovarian insufficiency
S22.1
Genetic aspects of folliculogenesis
Kui Liu
Sweden.
In humans and other mammalian species, follicular development is a complicated
process. The pool of resting primordial follicles serves as the source of developing
follicles and fertilizable ova for the entire length of female reproductive life. In
recent  years,  molecular  mechanisms  underlying  follicular  activation  and
development have become more evident, mainly through the use of genetically
modified mouse models. Recently reported mutant mouse models have shown
that a synergistic and coordinated suppression of follicular activation provided by
multiple inhibitory molecules is necessary to preserve the dormant follicular pool.
Several molecules and pathways operating in both the somatic primordial follicle
granulosa cells
(pfGCs) and oocytes have been shown to be important for
primordial follicle activation and development. In this presentation, we will
summarize both historical and recent studies on mammalian primordial follicular
activation  and  focus  on  the  up-to-date  knowledge  of  molecular  networks
controlling this important physiological event. These advances may provide a
better understanding of human ovarian physiology and pathophysiology for future
clinical applications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S22.1
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
S22.2
Cohesin ring, meiosis and primary ovarian insufficiency
Reiner Veitia
Primary ovarian insufficiency is a disorder resulting in the loss of ovarian
function. It is a multifactorial condition characterized by amenorrhea, estradiol
deficiency and high FSH levels before the age of 40 years. Most POI cases are
idiopathic. Although genes encoding factors involved in meiosis and DNA repair
have been considered as obvious candidates to explain POI cases, it is only
recently that whole-exome sequencing explorations have incriminated causal
mutations in genes such as STAG3, SYCE1, MCM8, MCM9, HFM1, etc. These
findings will be discussed in the context of POI but also from the perspective of
male (in)fertility.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S22.2
S22.3
Ovarian protection during cancer treatments
Richard Anderson
UK.
Recent years have seen a dramatic rise in interest in preserving fertility in women
facing treatment for cancer and other serious diseases, and fertility preservation is
rapidly becoming a mainstream part of reproductive medicine. This approach,
however, serves to remove oocytes or ovarian tissue before cancer treatment,
rather  than  directly  protecting  the  ovary  itself.  Some  chemotherapies  and
radiotherapy have well known adverse effects on follicle number, although the
details of the effects and their magnitude for chemotherapeutic agents are often
poorly characterised. Thus, emerging evidence suggests that different agents can
have differential effects on the oocyte itself, the surrounding granulosa cells, and
the ovarian stroma including the ovarian vasculature. This may mean that
different protective strategies may be needed for different chemotherapeutic
agents. There have been studies for many years investigating the potential
protective  effect  of  GnRH  agonists  on  the  ovary  administered  during
chemotherapy. Initial studies were underpowered and often uncontrolled, but
recently larger well powered RCTs have shown a consistent beneficial effect in
reducing the risk of premature ovarian insufficiency after chemotherapy for early
breast cancer. Smaller studies have also been undertaken in other cancers,
particularly lymphoma, but these have not shown a clear benefit. This may reflect
the specific treatment regimens involved in those studies, rather than being a
feature of the diagnoses. Non-hormonal approaches have also been investigated,
although largely confined to animal studies. These have often focused on the
potentially beneficial effects of sphingosine-1-phosphate, and the tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, Imatinib. Generally, conflicting results have been reported, thus, there is
a need for greater understanding of potential mechanisms of action before
introduction to clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S22.3
Indications of incretin based therapies
S23.1
GLP-1 in type 1 diabetic patients
Thomas Dejgaard
Denmark.
The treatment of type 1 diabetes is currently restricted to insulin therapy.
However, achieving and maintaining strict glycaemic control is a demanding task
for many patients and increases the risk of hypoglycaemia and weight gain. This
makes new treatments complementary to insulin of interest. In type 2 diabetes, the
combination of insulin and a GLP-1 receptor agonist improves glycaemic control,
induces weight loss and reduces daily insulin dose needed. However, only little
evidence exists about the efficacy and safety of the combination in patients with
type 1 diabetes.
Mechanistic studies suggest that GLP-1 enhances endogenous insulin secretion in
patients with preserved beta cell function. Furthermore, it improves postprandial
glucose control through a reduction in gastric emptying rate and an inhibition of
postprandial glucagon secretion, regardless of residual beta cell function in type 1
diabetes. Nevertheless, the clinical data are conflicting in regard to the effect on
HbA1c. Improvements have been reported in small-scale, non-randomised and/or
retrospective studies. Recently the first two randomised, controlled trials were
published reporting similar improvements in HbA1c in liraglutide and placebo
treated patients. Reductions in insulin dose and body weight are consistently
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
reported in all studies. Furthermore, episodes of mild hypoglycaemia were
reduced compared with placebo in one study.
Adverse events in all trials were common and predominantly gastrointestinal, i.e.
nausea, obstipation and vomiting, often transient and most pronounced when
initiating therapy. No serious or unknown side effects have emerged so far.
Currently GLP-1 receptor agonists are not approved for the treatment of type 1
diabetes. Further research is needed on both short- and long-acting agonists to
improve knowledge about the therapeutic potentials. The effect in new onset type
1 diabetes is also of major interest.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S23.1
S23.2
GLP-1 in type 2-diabetic patients
Michael Nauck
GLP-1 is one of the two known incretin hormones (the other one being GIP),
which  have  the  ability  to  stimulate  insulin  secretion  whenever  glucose
concentrations are above a certain permissive threshold. The incretin effect
(greater stimulation of insulin secretory responses with oral as compared to
matched intravenous glucose administration) is reduced in patients with type 2
diabetes, thus the question needed to be addressed, whether there is hyposecretion
or impaired action of incretin hormones in patients with type 2 diabetes. Initial
findings suggested lesser secretion of GLP-1 in patients with type 2 diabetes,
however, with multiple studies available that address this question, no consistent
deficiency has been found in meta-analyses. GIP has lost most of its insulinotropic
activity in patients with type 2 diabetes, probably related to the overall deficiency
in b-cells typical for this condition. Some effectiveness of GLP-1 is preserved in
type 2 diabetes, although strictly speaking, the effects of GLP-1 in such patients
are reduced, if compared to healthy subjects with normal glucose tolerance.
Nevertheless, the effects elicited by GLP-1 or other agents interacting with GLP-1
receptors (GLP-1 receptor agonists) are sufficient to elicit clinically meaningful
effects, reducing glucose concentrations in hyperglycaemic patients with type 2
diabetes. Because of the nature of the interaction with b-cells in the islet of
Langerhans, GLP-1 receptor stimulation does not trigger hypoglycaemia, and
therapy with incretin-based glucose-lowering medications is not complicated by
hypoglycaemia, even if near-normal glucose concentrations are achieved. In
addition, GLP-1 receptor agonists induce weight loss, the extent of which,
however, is highly variable. As an injctable treatment, GLP-1 receptor agonists
are as effective as simple insulin regimens in terms of reducing HbA1c. GLP-1
receptor agonists can be used in conjunction with insulin. Novel approaches use
fixed-dose combinations of basal insulin and a GLP-1 receptor agonist.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S23.2
S23.3
The role of GLP-1 in body weight regulation: lessons from human trials
Arne Astrup
Denmark.
In 1996, we showed that GLP-1 is a satiety hormone in humans, and increased
post-prandial GLP-1 levels following high protein meals have shown to be at least
partially responsible for the high satiating effect of protein. The natural ligands to
stimulate GLP-1 release seem to be peptide fragments and monoacylglycerides.
The once-daily GLP-1 analogue liraglutide at doses up to 3.0 mg was compared
with placebo or orlistat over 104 weeks as adjunct to diet and exercise in 564
obese individuals with without diabetes. After 52 weeks, mean weight loss was
greater with liraglutide 3.0 mg (7.8 kg) vs placebo (2.0 kg) or orlistat (3.9 kg)
[both P%0.0001].
In  the  SCALE  Obesity  and  Prediabetes
160-week  double-blind  trial,
2254
individuals with prediabetes and obesity or overweight with comorbidities, were
randomized 2:1 to liraglutide 3.0 mg (nZ1505) or placebo (nZ749). The primary
objective was to evaluate the proportion of patients with type 2 diabetes at 160
weeks. Time to onset of diabetes was 2.7 times longer with liraglutide 3.0 mg
(nZ1505) vs placebo (nZ749) [95% CI: 1.9-3.9, P!0.0001] (HR: 0.2). At week
160, mean weight loss from baseline was 6.1% with liraglutide 3.0 mg vs. 1.9%
with placebo (P!0.0001).
Liraglutide 3.0 mg was well-tolerated, with mild or moderate gastrointestinal side
effects being the most frequently reported. Serious adverse events occurred in
15.1% of individuals in the liraglutide group vs, 12.9% with placebo. Gallbladder-
related events (2.9 vs 1.2/100 patient years of observation (PYO)) and confirmed
pancreatitis (0.29 vs 0.13 events/100 PYO) were low, but more frequent with
liraglutide 3.0 mg vs placebo.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
In summary, GLP-1 is an endogenous satiety hormone involved in appetite
regulation and GLP-1 receptor agonists can reduce body weight and diabetes risk
over 3 years.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S23.3
Endocrine neoplasias: new associations
(Endorsed by the European Journal of Endocrinology)
S24.1
Abstract unavailable.
S24.2
Abstract unavailable.
S24.3
Abstract unavailable.
What’s new and exciting in nuclear receptor action?
S25.1
Abstract unavailable.
S25.2
Ligand independent activities of vitamin D receptor
Gilles Laverny
The bioactive form of Vitamin D [1,25(OH)2D3] plays a major role in calcium
homeostasis. Moreover, it has potent anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative
properties,  and  thus  is  a  potential  pharmacological  agent  to  treat  various
refractory diseases. Nevertheless, the doses required to elicit such effects induce
hypercalcemia. The activity of 1,25(OH)2D3 is mediated by the vitamin D
receptor (VDR), a member of nuclear receptor superfamily. A number of patients
with rickets carry mutations of VDR impairing either its DNA- or ligand- binding,
but only mutations impairing DNA binding induce alopecia.
In order to dissociate the calcemic activities of 1,25(OH)2D3 from its anti-
inflammatory and antiproliferative properties, more than 3000 analogs were
synthesized. The resolution of the VDR ligand binding domain 3D structure
facilitated  the  design  of  such  analogs,  but  no  potent  agonists  devoid  of
hypercalcemic activities have been obtained.
Based on VDR structural data, we generated mice expressing a point-mutated
VDR (VDRgem), unresponsive to 1,25(OH)2D3, but the activity of which is
induced by gemini ligands. We have shown that these mice present clinical signs
of rickets that their mineral ion and bone homeostasis are more impaired than in
VDR-null mice, and that unliganded VDR has repressive activities. As VDRgem
mice have a normal hair cycle in contrast to VDR-null mice, these results indicate
that skeletal defects might be more severe in patients expressing a ligand binding
deficient VDR than in those with full receptor deficiency. Thus, these results
might facilitate the stratification of patients with Vitamin-D dependent rickets.
In addition, we have shown that administration of gemini ligands to VDRgem
mice normalizes their serum calcium levels, demonstrating that the activity of
VDRgem can be induced in-vivo. Further analysis of VDRgem mice should help
to unravel both liganded and unliganded VDR signaling.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S25.2
S25.3
Molecular battles between corticosteroid receptors in the heart
John Cidlowski
Heart failure is a leading cause of death in man, and stress is increasingly
associated with adverse cardiac outcomes. Glucocorticoids are primary stress
hormones, but their direct role in cardiovascular health and disease is poorly
understood. To determine the in vivo function of glucocorticoid signaling in the
heart,  we  generated  mice  with  cardiomyocyte-specific  deletion  of  the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The cardioGRKO mice appear normal early in
life but die prematurely due to spontanious heart failure. In contrast, knockout of
the  cardiomyocyte  mineralocorticoid  receptors
(MR)  does  not  lead  to
cardiovascular  disease.  To  investigate  whether  glucocorticoid  activation  of
cardiomyocyte MR contributes to the pathology in the cardioGRKO mice, we
generated mice lacking both GR and MR in cardiomyocytes. Strikingly, the
cardioGRMRKO mice are protected from the development of heart failure. These
findings reveal that cardiomyocyte MR signaling, when unopposed by GR
signaling, plays a major role in the progression of cardiac disease. Moreover, they
suggest that combining GR agonists with MR antagonists may represent an
improved therapeutic approach for treating heart disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S25.3
An update on bone homeostasis and osteoporosis
(Endorsed by the European Journal of Endocrinology)
S26.1
Genetics of human bone formation
Wim Van Hul
Bone mineral density (BMD) and bone mass are quantitative traits that are the
result of the two balanced processed of bone resorption and bone formation. Often
they  are  used  as  a  surrogate  phenotype  for  the  diagnosis  of  osteoporosis,
characterized by an increased fracture risk due to a decreased bone mass and
deterioration of the microarchitecture of the bone.
Variation in BMD is determined by both environmental and genetic factors with
50-85% of the variance being controlled by genetic factors. In a minority of the
cases, abnormal BMD can be explained by one mutation in one gene with a large
impact. These mutations can result in monogenic bone disorders with either an
extreme  high  or  low  BMD.  However,  in  most  cases  the  genetic  factors
contributing to variation in BMD are highly polygenic. Identification of these
genetic factors regulating bone mass has been a challenge in the last decades. So
far, over
70 loci have been identified explaining around 6% of the genetic
variation.
Identification of the disease causing genes in monogenic diseases increased the
knowledge on the regulation of bone mass and highlighted important signaling
pathways. Especially the identification of the essential role of Wnt signaling in
bone formation turned out to be a major breakthrough. Interestingly, a large
number of genes from this pathway turned out to play a role, not only in
conditions with extremely low or high bone density but genetic variants in these
genes also contribute to the variation of BMD in the general population. Since
only 6% of the genetic variation is yet identified, additional studies with different
study design are needed to identify all genes involved in bone formation and the
regulation of bone mass.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S26.1
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
S26.2
Sex steroids and bone metabolism
Marie Lagerquist
Sweden.
Fractures are associated with suffering and increased mortality in patients and
great costs for society. It is well established that sex steroids are important
regulators of skeletal growth and bone metabolism and estrogen is known to
protect against bone loss and prevent fractures. Estrogen not only protects the
female skeleton, but is also associated with bone mass and fracture risk in the
male skeleton. However, the use of this hormone as a therapeutic drug against
bone loss is restricted due to severe side-effects, such as increased risk of breast
cancer and stroke. It is therefore important to increase our knowledge regarding
the mechanisms underlying the protective effects of estrogen on the skeleton in
order to provide the possibility to develop new bone-specific treatment options
which can separate the positive, bone-protective, effects from adverse estrogenic
effects. Estrogen exerts its effects via estrogen receptors and ERa is an important
mediator of the protective estrogenic effects on bone, both in the female and the
male skeleton. In experimental studies, using different genetically modified
animal models, our research group is working on determining i) the importance of
estrogen signaling in different specific celltypes and ii) the role of different
signaling pathways in cells, including the importance of different posttransla-
tional modification sites in the ERa. The aim is to provide a summary of what is
known regarding sex steroids and their impact on bone metabolism with focus on
target cells for estrogen and estrogen receptor signalling pathways.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S26.2
S26.3
New bone-forming treatments for osteoporosis
Socrates Papapoulos
The Netherlands.
Most currently available agents for the treatment of osteoporosis decrease bone
resorption and turnover to varying degrees but do not stimulate the formation of
new bone that is essential for the management of patients with severe disease.
Teriparatide, the most extensively studied bone -forming treatment stimulates not
only bone formation but also resorption, acts mainly at sites undergoing active
remodeling  and  increases  cortical  porosity.  The  newly  developed  PTHrP
analogue,  abaloparatide,  has  similar  but  less  pronounced  effects  on  bone
remodeling  and  increases  hip  BMD  significantly  more  than  teriparatide.
Combination treatment with teripatatide and the resorption inhibitor denosumab
increased BMD at all skeletal sites significantly more than either monotherapy
after one year suggesting that for optimal therapeutic outcome bone formation
and resorption should be modulated in opposite directions. The recognition of the
role of Wnt signaling pathway in bone formation by osteoblasts provided a
number of potential targets for the development of novel pharmaceuticals (eg.
sclerostin, Dkk1 and LRP4). The restricted expression of sclerostin in the skeleton
and the lack of abnormalities of organs other than the skeleton in humans and
animals with sclerostin deficiency made this protein the most attractive target.
Inhibition  of  sclerostin  in  animals  stimulated  cancellous  and  cortical  bone
formation,  that  was  mainly  modeling-based,  and  increased  bone  mass  and
strength while bone resorption was decreased suggesting a functional uncoupling
of bone formation and resorption. Two humanized antibodies to sclerostin,
blosozumab and romosozumab were investigated in clinical phase I and II studies.
These antibodies given subcutaneously once every 4 weeks induced marked
increases in BMD of the spine and the hip associated with rapid transient
increases in bone formation markers and decrease of bone resorption markers.
On-going phase III studies with romosozumab with fracture outcomes will also
provide information about the long-term safety and tolerability of sclerostin
inhibitors, essential for the introduction of any new treatment into clinical
practice.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S26.3
Why do we gain weight; homeostasis and rewards
of ingestive behaviour
S27.1
Obesity medication reduces the reward value of food
Lora Heisler
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Obesity is a primary healthcare challenge of the 21st century. Medications
increasing the bioavailability of the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytripta-
mine; 5-HT) have historically been used for obesity treatment. 5-HT primarily
influences appetite via action at the 5-HT2C receptor (5-HT2CR); the clinical
significance of which has recently been realized with the launch of the 5-HT2CR
agonist lorcaserin for obesity treatment in the USA. Efforts to delineate the
underpinnings of 5-HT2CR appetite suppression have largely focused upon
action  within  the  hypothalamus,  a  crucial  brain  region  modulating  energy
homeostasis. However, another neuroanatomical population of 5-HT2CRs is
located within the ventral tegmental area (VTA), a primary node within reward
circuits. To examine the physiological significance of 5-HT2CRs within the VTA,
we  utilized  designer  receptors  exclusively  activated  by  designer  drugs
(DREADD) technology to probe the discrete function of VTA 5-HT2CRs in
the reward value of food. Designer Gq receptor (AAV8-hSyn-DIO-hM3Dq-
mCherry) was bilaterally injected into the VTA of 5-HT2CR-Cre mice producing
5-HT2CR-Cre:hM3Dq-expressing  neurons  exclusively  within the VTA.  The
selective activation of these neurons by designer drug clozapine-N-oxide (CNO)
significantly suppressed home cage laboratory chow intake. Further analysis
indicated that this was related to a reduction in food reward. Specifically, discrete
simulation  of
5-HT2CRs  within  the  VTA  significantly  suppressed  operant
responding for food reward (chocolate pellets), both when mice were motivated to
eat through food restriction and in the free feeding condition. To evaluate the
translational significance of this finding, we next examined whether human
obesity medication 5-HT2CR agonist lorcaserin influences the reward value of
food. The same concentrations of lorcaserin that reduced ad libitum home cage
food  intake also significantly reduced  operant responding for food  reward.
Thereby, these data suggest that a component of lorcaserin-induced appetite
suppression is due to a reduction in food reward and identify that the little studied
population of VTA 5-HT2CRs are sufficient to mediate this effect.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S27.1
S27.2
Brain systems involved in food intake - a neuroimaging approach
Stefanie Brassen
Germany.
As part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Centre TR-SFB134 we study
central insulin effects on hedonic food processing across the life-span. So far, 48
younger participants across a wide weight-range (BMI: 18-38) were investigated
with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during a hedonic food
processing task after receiving intranasal insulin (160UI) or placebo in a cross-
over design after an overnight fast. Imaging results during the placebo session
reveal a robust activation pattern of homeostatic (ventral hypothalamus) and
reward-related (ventral tegmental area, ventral striatum, amygdala, ventromedial
and orbitofrontal cortex) neurocircuits. Behaviorally, insulin application reduced
food liking only in participants with normal insulin-sensitivity, as indicated by an
insulin resistance index HOMA-IR of % 2 (NZ28). Only in participants with an
increased  HOMA-IR  O  2  (NZ20),  plasma  insulin  levels  during  placebo
predicted food liking, i.e. participants with a moderate endogenous insulin level
demonstrated reduced food liking while elevated levels were related to high food
liking scores. On the neural level, behavioral insulin effects were paralleled by
activation changes in the hypothalamus and regions of the reward system. In our
ongoing  analyses  we  are  now  focusing  on  group-  and  insulin-effects  on
connectivity patterns between homeostatic and dopaminergic brain regions as
well as on non-linear insulin effects on behavior and brain function. Given recent
animal  data  on  differential  central  insulin  action  in  different  areas  of  the
dopaminergic reward system, our approach might be useful to translate and
extend current hypotheses to the human brain.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S27.2
S27.3
How hypothalamus senses and stimulates food intake
Tamas L Horvath
USA.
Emerging evidence indicates that the hypothalamus is a key regulator of the
adaptation of the central nervous system (CNS) to the changing environment in
support of survival, with subsets of hypothalamic neurons acting as upstream
regulators of brain regions classically considered as master determinants of CNS
function, such  as  the cortex  and hippocampus.  The regulatory role  of  the
hypothalamus in cortical and hippocampal functions is mediated via classical
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
neuronal pathways and by the regulation of peripheral tissue output in the form of
hormones and nutrients. Here, we argue that when the relationships between these
brain regions and peripheral tissues are reconsidered based on these driving
principles of health and survival, it is challenging to envision that long-lasting
successful strategies to combat obesity can emerge from propagation of satiety
and energy expenditure. We also argue that many hypothalamus-driven metabolic
principles will have important implications for neurological and psychiatric
conditions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S27.3
Adrenal Insufficiency: Causes and management
S28.1
Abstract unavailable.
S28.2
Genetics of adrenal insufficiency
Christa Fluck
Switzerland.
Genetic  defects  causing  primary,  central  secondary  or  tertiary  adrenal
insufficiency (AI) belong to the group of rare diseases that involve multiple
candidate genes. In primary AI adrenal defects lead to hormonal deficiencies.
Underlying genetic mutations may be found either in genes involved in the
development of the adrenal gland (e.g. DAX1/NR0B1) or in genes that are
essential for the signaling, regulation (e.g. MC2R, MRAP) or the biosynthesis of
steroid hormones (e.g. StAR, CYP11A1 etc.) and their cofactors (e.g. POR) and
mitochondrial partners (e.g. NNT).
Genetic defects causing isolated, secondary (central) AI due to corticotropin
deficiency are very rare and include TPIT, while genetic mutations of PCSK1 and
POMC not only cause AI but also manifest with massive obesity, hypogonado-
tropic hypogonadism and abnormal glucose homeostasis. In addition, AI may also
be part of the clinical spectrum of developmental defects of the pituitary gland
leading to multiple pituitary hormone deficiency (e.g. HESX1, LIM4, PROP1).
This symposium lecture will cover the genetics of human mutations causing AI
and elucidate what we learnt from those experiments of nature.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S28.2
S28.3
Abstract unavailable.
New insights into the pathogenesis of PCOS
S29.1
Metabolic dysfunction in a rodent model of PCOS
Jenny Visser
The Netherlands.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine disorder in
women in their reproductive age. Based on the Rotterdam criteria PCOS is
diagnosed by at least two out of the following three criteria: hyperandrogenism,
oligo/anovulation, and polycystic ovaries. To date, the underlying cause of PCOS
remains unknown, although the elevated androgen levels are suggested to play an
important role in the development of PCOS. In addition to ovarian dysfunction,
women with PCOS display metabolic disturbances, such as obesity and insulin
resistance. The accompanied elevated insulin levels can stimulate the ovary
causing ovarian androgen production to increase even further. Thus, the elevated
androgen and insulin levels may constitute a detrimental vicious circle between
ovarian and metabolic dysfunctioning.
Animal models may aid in getting a better understanding of the development of
PCOS and its the long term health consequences. To date, naturally occurring
animal models are unknown. Therefore, androgenisation of animals is most
frequently used to induce the reproductive and metabolic symptoms resembling
PCOS.
We  have  developed  a  mouse  PCOS  model  through  chronic  exposure  of
prepubertal mice to the non-aromatizable androgen DHT. At the end of the
90-day treatment period, DHT-treated mice were anovulatory and their antral
follicles had a cyst-like structure. These mice also displayed increased adiposity
and became glucose intolerant. In addition, analysis of their aortic vessels
revealed the presence of a vascular phenotype since DHT-treated mice had
decreased endothelial function. This suggests that exposure to DHT can induce
several reproductive and metabolic characteristics associated with PCOS in
women.
By applying this treatment regimen to transgenic mice, we can decipher the
interaction between androgens and other factors, such as gonadal growth factors,
to PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S29.1
S29.2
Energy balance and androgens
Colin Duncan
UK.
PCOS is associated with increased androgens, elevated insulin and obesity. As
obesity and androgens promote insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia increases
ovarian androgen production, and the likelihood of obesity, the interaction
between these factors is complex. We investigated the development of insulin
resistance, hyperandrogenism and obesity using a clinically realistic ovine model
of PCOS. Exposure of the pregnant ewe to increased testosterone from d62 to
d102 of gestation (d147) programs female offspring to develop a PCOS-like
condition.  These  offspring  have  normal  external  genitalia  and  a  normal
birthweight. However in adulthood they become obese with hyperinsulinemia,
increased ovarian and adrenal androgens and anovulation. Increased androgen
and insulin concentrations are manifest in adolescence when the sheep are
ovulatory  and  of  normal  weight.  However  there  are  fetal  antecedents  of
hyperinsulinemia in the pancreas and of hyperandrogenism in the ovary. This
suggests that insulin and androgen dysregulation develop in parallel, with fetal
origins, as a consequence of prenatal androgen action. Androgen administration
to control adult females reduced insulin sensitivity to that of the PCOS-like adults
while  androgen  treatment  of  PCOS-like  sheep  did  not  cause  any  further
deterioration. Metabolic assessment of prenatally programmed PCOS-like adult
sheep demonstrated a reduction in postprandial thermogenesis, not seen in weight
matched control sheep with intake-driven obesity, which was correlated with
insulin resistance. This was associated with molecular alterations in subcutaneous
adipocyte function, which could first be detected in adolescence before the
development of obesity. Androgens alter energy balance in females but in PCOS
it is likely that prenatal exposure to increased androgens, rather than ongoing
postnatal exposure, is a major factor in the dysregulated energy balance. Women
with PCOS have reduced post-prandial thermogenesis and this is recapitulated in
the ovine model of PCOS. This suggests that women with PCOS have a driver
towards obesity with developmental origins.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S29.2
S29.3
Abstract unavailable.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Disorders of development and function of neurohypophysis
S30.1
Copeptin in the differential diagnosis and prediction of diabetes
insipidus
Mirjam Christ-Crain
Endocrinology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
Copeptin and arginine vasopressin (AVP) derive from a common precursor
molecule and show equimolar secretion and response to osmotic, haemodynamic
and stress-related stimuli. Plasma concentrations of copeptin and AVP in relation
to serum osmolality are highly correlated. In contrast to AVP, which can be
difficult to measure, copeptin is stable in plasma and can be easily measured with
a sandwich immunoassay. For this reason, copeptin has emerged as a promising
marker for the diagnosis of AVP-dependent fluid disorders. This talk will focus on
copeptin in the differential diagnosis of diabetes insipidus and primary polydipsia
and on the prediction of diabetes insipidus in patients undergoing pituitary
surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S30.1
S30.2
Role of TBI in the development of neurohypophyseal disorders
Mark Sherlock
Republic of Ireland.
Disorders of salt and water homeostasis are common following traumatic brain
injury. Diabetes insipidus is a well-recognized complication of TBI. Polyuria
occurs immediately after significant brain injury in up to 22% of cases, nearly
always occurring within the first 2-3 days. The great majority of cases resolve
spontaneously, and cross-sectional studies of long-term survivors of TBI report
low rates of chronic diabetes insipidus. It is likely that in the absence of formal
diagnostic  assessment  of  AVP  secretion,  many  patients  with
“subclinical”
diabetes insipidus remain undiagnosed and maintain normal plasma osmolality
through increased water intake.
Approximately 15% of patients recovering from TBI develop hyponatremia in the
acute recovery phase. In over 80% of these cases, hyponatremia is due to SIADH.
The natural history is for resolution of hyponatremia after recovery from the
neurological acute insult. Although ACTH deficiency may occur in the acute
recovery  phase  of  TBI,  hyponatremia  is  only  rarely  due  to  glucocorticoid
deficiency in this context, but cases do occur and a high index of suspicion is
required.
This talk will discuss the clinical management of neurohypophseal disorders
following traumatic brain injury.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S30.2
S30.3
SIADH: current and future management options
Chris Thompson
Republic of Ireland.
SIADH is the commonest cause of hyponatraemia in hospital practice SIADH
must be distinguished from hypovolaemic and hypervolaemic hyponatraemia,
and a diagnosis of euvolaemic hyponatraemia is established, the main differential
is between SIADH and glucocorticoid deficiency.
Not all cases of SIADH require active management. Drug induced SIADH usually
responds to drug withdrawal, though active management may speed up return to
eunatraemia  if  the  drug  has  a  long  half  life.  Mild  hyponatraemia  which
accompanies reversible conditions such as lobar pneumonia, often need no
treatment other than treatment of the underlying condition. However, as evidence
accumulates that hyponatraemia is associated with increased morbidity and
mortality, interest has grown in the opportunity to reduce morbidity and mortality
with active management.
Chronic hyponatraemia. The evidence base for the success of active management
is sparse. Most clinical guidelines recommend fluid restriction (FR) as first line
therapy, though the evidence base for success of therapy is limited. A number of
parameters, such as urine osmolality O 500 mOsm/kg and Furst equation O 1
predict poor response to FR. Patients find FR difficult for long term treatment.
Demeclocycline  is  unreliable,  unlicensed,  has  no  evidence  base,  and  had
significant side effects. Urea has a limited, poor quality evidence base, and there is
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
no available compound for clinical use. Vasopressin receptor antagonists have the
backing of well-designed prospective studies, and undoubted clinical efficacy,
though the cost of therapy deters many clinicians.
Acute hyponatraemia. Acute symptomatic hyponatraemia is a medical emergency
associated with high mortality which can be reduced substantially by active
management. New guidelines have been altered to recommend an initial rise in
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
plasma sodium of 4-6 mmol/l over the initial 4-6 hours, as opposed to a steady
rise  in  plasma  sodium;  the  use  of  bolus  hypertonic  saline  compared  with
continuous infusion to achieve this goal will be discussed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.S30.3
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
New Scientific Approaches
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
NSA1
Abstract unavailable.
NSA2
Engineering an ovary bioprosthesis
Monica M Laronda
USA.
Patients with gonadotoxicity due to disease treatment, or who face primary
gonadal insufficiency as a result of genetic causes, have limited options for long-
term endocrine and fertility support. Current fertility options, such as egg or
embryo banking, exclude women with hormone-responsive cancers and pre-
pubertal children. This highlights the urgency of addressing this currently unmet
need with innovative engineering solutions. Our objective is to create an ovary
bioprosthesis that can restore function. We have implanted a bioinspired, scalable
3D-printed scaffold in an ovariectomized mouse that models human disease.
To better understand the natural ovarian environment, we decellularized, or
removed all of the cells, from bovine ovaries or human ovary slices and examined
the  remaining  organ  skeleton.  Through  scanning  electron  microscopy,  we
identified defined regions where quiescent primordial follicles reside in the cortex
and where large growing follicles reside in the medulla. The extracellular matrix
of the cortex contained stiffer laminin fibers and the medulla contained more
flexible fibronectin fibers, as both regions contained mostly collagen. This natural
ovary skeleton composition, architecture and mechanical properties inspired our
design for an ovarian implant. We developed a new method for printing gelatin,
a collagen-derived biomaterial, into scaffolds for the purpose of creating a self-
supporting ovary bioprosthesis skeleton. Using this method, we created scaffolds
with bioinspired pore structures and a stiffness after cross-linking (compressive
elastic modulus w30 kPa) similar to that of the ovary (elastic modulus 5-20 kPa).
We tested several scaffold designs to optimize ovarian follicle survival and
function. Our criteria were to maintain high mechanical properties of the implant
for desirable surgical handling while creating space from scaffold porosity to
enable follicle expansion, ovulation and release of an egg, vascularization and
passage of follicle paracrine signals. Our intersecting 308 and 608 advancing angle
designs, that allow for multiple strut contacts, supported folliculogenesis at a
significantly higher rate than scaffolds created with a
908 advancing angle
containing through-pores (308, 78.6% G3.6 survival; 608, 75.9% G4.0 survival;
908, 48.5% G8.3, PZ0.01). The 308 and 608 scaffolds supported two or more
follicle contacts at a higher rate than the 908 scaffolds. These additional contacts
were essential for sustained follicle health over the 8-day culture (74.3% G6.5
survival with two or more strut contacts versus 33.2% G11.3 with one strut
contact,  PZ0.01).  Three-dimensional  confocal  analysis  confirmed  that  the
follicles were supported within the manufactured follicle niche structures of the
308 and 608 scaffolds and interacted with the struts. Follicular somatic cells
robustly expressed vinculin, a focal adhesion protein, along the pore struts and
spread those struts. The length of spreading was significantly less with more
contacts, which provided support for the follicle’s spheroid structure as the
basement membrane was maintained (average contact length when contacting
one strut 198.7 mm G42.8; two struts 104.8 mm G14.0; three struts 59.5 mm G
5.4; P!0.005). Follicles within the intersecting scaffold designs stained positive
for 3b hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, released estradiol over an 8-day in vitro
culture, and upon exposure to human chorionic gonadotropin, ovulated and
released MII eggs through the open porosity without mechanical or enzymatic
manipulation  of  the  follicular  cells  or  scaffold.  The  implantable  ovary
bioprosthesis was constructed by down-selecting to a 608 3D printed scaffold
and seeded with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-positive quiescent primordial
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
and growing primary and secondary murine follicles. The bioprostheses were
implanted into the native organ site in ovariectomized GFP-negative mice. These
follicle-seeded bioactive scaffolds supported vascular infiltration without the
addition of angiogenic factors, restored the estrous cycle (as observed through
vaginal cytology) and produced live offspring. These healthy offspring were
supported by the lactating implant recipient mother until weaning.
These data underscore the importance of the bioactive scaffold architecture in
supporting folliculogenesis and demonstrate a functional ovary bioprosthesis.
This research expands beyond the current state of tissue engineering toward
developing a common scheme for complex soft tissue replacement through
bioinspired-manufacturing of bioactive scaffolds.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.NSA2
NSA3
Abstract unavailable.
NSA4
Single cell transcriptomics in endocrine system physiology: example
from the pancreas
Stefan Kubicek
Austria.
The specialized endocrine cell types of pancreatic islets of Langerhans are
essential for maintaining glucose homeostasis. Bulk approaches to characterize
islets in normal and diabetic conditions are challenging, as both cell-type specific
gene expression changes, changes in the composition of islets, and changes in
cell types including de- and trans-differentiation can contribute. Furthermore,
technologies to isolate specific cell types from human islets are often lacking, and
where available prone to induce gene expression changes in the purification
process.
Therefore, we applied single-cell RNA sequencing on cells sorted from human
primary islets. We show that using this technology we can validate previously
described  and  discover  novel  marker  genes  at  for  individual  cell  types.
Furthermore, we identify key differences between human and rodent islets, and
we observe islet-cell specific expression of diabetes risk genes identified from
genome-wide association studies.
In summary, the establishment of single cell transcriptomics opens up numerous
possibilities to characterize islets in normal and diabetic conditions, but also to
clarify islet-cell type specific effects of therapeutic intervention.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.NSA4
NSA5
Abstract unavailable.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Debate
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
The use of NSAIDs in endocrine cancers: the case of
Celecoxib
D1.1
Abstract unavailable.
D1.2
The use of NSAIDs in endocrine cancers: the case of Celecoxib: FOR
Joan Carles
Spain.
NSAIDs  inhibit  cyclooxygenase  activity  and  thereby  reduce  prostaglandin
synthesis. Two genetic isoforms of COX have been characterized: COX 1
constituvely produced in most tissues and COX 2 is not expressed in most normal
tissues which is induced by pro inflammatory and mitogenic stimuli. Chronic
inflammation  and  oxidative  stress  are  key  players  in  COX2
dependent
carcinogenesis and it is important to point out that this type of inflammation
has been associated with cancer in different tumors including endocrine tumors,
such as prostate and breast cancer.
Preclinical and clinical evidence suggest that COX2 is an attractive target for the
treatment or prevention of different endocrine tumors. It has been shown that
COX2 is overexpressed in breast and in prostate cancer tissue.
Different mechanisms of action have been postulated: promote tumor specific
angiogenesis, inhibit apoptosis, modulation of IL6, IL8 modulation of cholesterol
and the final hormones (testosterone and estradiol). Also COX2 inhibitors can
minimize certain typical side effects of chemotherapy such as mucositis, diarrhea
and other inflammatory toxic effects.
Results from different clinical trials in will be reviewed endocrine malignancies
during the meeting.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.D1.2
D1.3
The use of NSAIDs in endocrine cancers: the case of Celecoxib
AGAINST
Andrea Sacchetti
The Netherlands.
The antitumor properties of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
with respect to both cancer prevention and therapy, have raised considerable
interest in the last two decades, leading to well consolidated evidences in
gastrointestinal cancers, especially colorectal cancer. NSAID action has been
proposed to occur through two independent modes: a COX-dependent one,
mainly involving the inhibition of COX-2-mediated PGE2 production, and a
COX-independent one, mainly involving direct toxicity to tumor cells. Among
NSAIDs,  Celecoxib  is  considered  particularly promising as  antitumor  drug
because of both selective COX-2 inhibition and powerful COX-independent
toxicity on tumor cells.
However, I have recently demonstrated that the direct toxicity of Celecoxib,
mostly observed in vitro, relies on precipitate-dependent cell damage rather than
molecular effects (Sacchetti, J Cell Biochem. 2013 Jun; 114(6): 1434-44) and
requires concentrations of the drug much higher than those observed during
therapy, with the exception of some regions of the gastrointestinal tract. If, in the
latter,  COX-inhibition  may  be  effectively  potentiated  by  COX-independent
actions from Celecoxib and/or its (COX)-inactive metabolites, leading to relevant
antitumor effects, on non-gastrointestinal tumors the action of Celecoxib is
probably limited to COX-2 inhibition and, as a matter of fact, its efficacy is less
pronounced and still controversial.
Overall, because of the misleading toxicity observed in vitro, the potential of
Celecoxib as antitumor agent has been probably overestimated in comparison
with other NSAIDs, while limited beneficial effects must be accurately weighted
against unwanted risks, in particular cardiovascular toxicity associated with
COX-2 inhibitors. For what concerns endocrine cancers, it is early to draw
conclusions, considering the heterogeneity of these tumors and the limited
literature on the subject. However, the available evidences do not support the idea
of testing Celecoxib as a first choice in prevention or therapy, but suggest
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
considering other NSAIDS as well, or combinations of NSAIDs, in pre-clinical
models and clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.D1.3
Should we treat subclinical Cushing’s syndrome?
D2.1
Abstract unavailable.
D2.2
Are we ready for pharmacological therapy of obesity?: AGAINST
Uberto Pagotto
Italy.
The ongoing obesity epidemic is one of the main concerns worldwide and for this
reason preventive strategies to reduce the future global health and the economic
costs of this disease are urgently needed. Diets for weight loss and physical
activity represent the cornerstone of treatment for patients who are overweight
and/or  obese,  in  particular  to  improve  the  frequent  comorbid  conditions
associated with obesity. Now and in the past multiple medications have been
approved for chronic weight management in order to pharmacologically treating
obesity like other chronic diseases. However, still a number of doubts has been
attributed to the use of drugs to curb obesity mainly due to a series of factors:
i) The modest efficacy of the current medications options often limited to 5-10%
body weight loss
ii) The lack of long-term studies clearly demonstrating a final beneficial effects of
anti-obesity  drugs  when  compared  to  bariatric  surgery  with  respect  to  the
cardiovascular events
iii) The previous experience of serious safety inducing a risk-to-benefit ratio no
longer favourable toward anti-obesity drugs
iv) The limited possibility to provide an individualized pharmacotherapy in
consideration of the heterogeneity featuring obesity phenotype
v)  The  economical  cost  of  the  drugs  for  the  national  Agencies  when
reimbursement is approved or for the single patient when not
All  these  reasons  supporting  the  idea  that  we  are  not  yet  ready  for
pharmacological therapy of obesity will be critically revised during the lecture.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.D2.2
Strengths and weaknesses of hormone immunoassays and
mass spectrometry: what the clinician should know
D3.1
Strengths and weaknesses of hormone immunoassays and mass
spectrometry: what the clinician should know: mass spectrometry
Brian Keevil
UK.
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is a powerful
tool that is changing the way we analyse steroids in the clinical laboratory. It
offers positive compound identification to enable the unequivocal identification of
a compound free from interference. LC-MS/MS is already opening up the field of
steroid analysis in endocrinology and is providing new applications for individual
steroids and panels of steroids in different clinical conditions. LC-MS/MS is now
well-accepted technology and is increasingly being used to replace problematic
immunoassay methods because of greater sensitivity and specificity. Improved
sample  preparation,  modern  chromatography  methods  and  sensitive,  faster
scanning mass spectrometers have all played a role in improving LC-MS/MS.
LC-MS/MS is also playing a key role in improving the quality of assays through
the  development  of  reference  measurement  procedures,  characterisation  of
reference materials and multi-site calibration programmes. There is increasing
interest in multiplexing steroid assays into panels of diagnostic tests to aid and
improve the diagnosis and monitoring of disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.D3.1
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
D3.2
Abstract unavailable.
Are we ready for pharmacological therapy of obesity?
D4.1
Abstract unavailable.
D4.2
Should we treat subclinical Cushing’s syndrome?
Paul M Stewart
UK.
The term subclinical Cushing syndrome arose at the turn of the millennium with
the description of large Italian study of adrenal incidentalomas. Of 1096 patients
from 26 centres, 9.2% had ‘subclinical Cushing’s’ (JCEM, 2000; 85:637-644).
Since then over 300 publications have detailed this newly discovered endocrine
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
diagnosis, and herein lies the main issue. The definition of Cushing’s syndrome is
not in doubt - a ‘constellation of symptoms and signs that reflect prolonged and
inappropriately high exposure of tissues to glucocorticoids’. No single test has
100% sensitivity or specificity, which is why the guidelines suggest numerous
screening tests including urinary free cortisol (UFC), late night salivary cortisol
(LNSC) or a 1mg overnight dexamethasone (DEXA). Sensitivity is high to avoid
missing the ‘killing disease’ at the expense of specificity so that a false positive
result is 50! more commoner than a true positive. False positives are common in
patients with ‘physiological’ cortisol hypersecretion, such as those with diabetes,
obesity and depression.
Adrenal incidentalomas have a prevalence rate of 7% in subjects over 70 years,
where prevalence rates for diabetes are 25%, hypertension 65%, obesity 35% and
osteoporosis 16% (male) and 47% (female). Papers describe abnormalities in a
host of variable diagnostic tests that have included random cortisol, loss of
circadian rhythm, DHAS, blunted ACTH response to CRF in addition to the
‘guidelines’ screening tests of UFC, LNSC and o/n Dexa in variable doses. No
wonder that 9% of such patients have abnormal results - the specificity of these
tests predicts exactly that!
Within the ‘subclinical’ literature, and our own personal experiences there are
undoubtedly patients with adrenal incidentalomas who do have inappropriate
cortisol hypersecretion, the hallmark of which must be suppressed ACTH. With
the current lack of evidence base for treating what is usually ‘mild disease’, in a
patient who may lack many of the discriminatory features of Cushing’s syndrome,
the physician will be guided by end organ effects of cortisol (BMI, BMD, glucose
tolerance, lipids, BP) in deciding whether or not to proceed to laparoscopic
adrenalectomy - but in doing so must accept that there is nothing ‘subclinical’ in
this scenario.
‘Subclinical Cushing syndrome’ currently comprises a majority of patients with
age related diseases and false positive abnormalities in HPA axis testing who DO
NOT have inappropriate cortisol hypersecretion. A small number of cases with
suppressed ACTH and inappropriate cortisol production causing low BMD, BP,
CVS risk and diabetes may need therapy, but then by definition are very much
‘clinical’ in nature.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.D4.2
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Meet the Expert Sessions
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
MTE1
Gynaecomastia in adult men is frequently a symptom of other diseases;
the Copenhagen experience
Niels Jørgensen
Denmark.
Breast development in boys and men, gynaecomastia, is a common condition. The
incidence peaks three times through life: neonatally in the first weeks after birth;
pubertally, usually around genital stage 3 to 4 and in adulthood with increasing
incidence after the age of 50 years.
Using a standardized diagnostic approach a cause for gynaecomastia developed in
adulthood can be detected in the majority of men, and gynaecomastia may be the
first presenting symptom of an underlying treatable pathology. The Copenhagen
experience is that when excluding men where gynaecomastia developed due to
abuse of anabolic steroids, an underlying reason might be detected in up to 70% of
the remaing men; in w30% it was due to medical treatment due to comorbities, in
w30% it was due to testosterone deficiency and in another 10% it was due to
other treatable caused. Furthermore, more than one reason was present in many
and a diagnostic approach ought to take that into account. The results emphasize
the importance of a thorough andrological-endocrinological examination in
patients presenting with gynaecomastia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.MTE1
MTE2.1-MTE2.2
Difficult thyroid cases
Carla Moran & Luca Persani
In clinical practice, most thyroid disease is due to thyroid gland dysfunction and
so can be detected by measurement of TSH alone. This is because the negative
feedback of thyroid hormones on the hypothalamus and pituitary gland result in
TSH levels that are closely, and inversely, correlated with circulating free thyroid
hormone (FT4, FT3) levels. However, several conditions are exceptions to this
rule and can be very hard to diagnose also due to a certain lack of awareness.
Examples of situations when measurement of TSH alone might be misleading
include:
- interference in TSH and/or FT4 measurements
- central hyperthyroidism due to TSH-secreting pituitary adenomas
- central hypothyroidism
- resistance to thyroid hormone action (RTHa or RTHb)
- disorders and drugs interfering in thyroid hormone transport and metabolism
In addition, depending on the type of thyroid hormone being taken excessively by
patients, exogenous thyrotoxicosis can present with variable abnormalities of
thyroid function tests, making the diagnosis of such cases very challenging.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.MTE2.1-MTE2.2
MTE3
Abstract unavailable.
MTE4
Treatment of osteoporosis; treatment goals and duration of therapy
Osteoporosis is a prevalent condition mainly involving the elderly with an
increased risk of fractures, morbidity and mortality. Partly due to ageing of the
population there is an increase in the prevalence of osteoporosis and fractures. It is
estimated that one in five men will experience a fragility fracture after the age of
50 years. Apart from lifestyle factors such as increasing physical exercise,
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
adequate  status  of  calcium  and  vitamin  D,  the  cessation  of  smoking  and
moderation  of  alcohol  intake,  there  are  multiple  treatment  options  for  the
prevention of osteoporotic fractures including antiresorptive agents such as
bisphosphonates and denosumab and anabolic therapy with recombinant human
parathyroid hormone (rhPTH) analogues.
The ultimate goal in the treatment of osteoporosis is the reduction in fracture risk
with an increase in BMD and restoration in bone microarchitecture. With current
available drugs the reduction in risk of fractures is much higher for vertebral than
for non-vertebral fractures. No therapy with osteoporosis drugs will be able
prevent all fractures  and the definition of treatment  failure  is lacking. An
important issue among clinicians is when to stop therapy and when to consider
switching drug. These issues will be discussed during this workshop, illustrated
with clinical cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.MTE4
MTE5
Abstract unavailable.
MTE6
MEN syndromes
Valeriano Leite
Portugal.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes are classically defined as
the occurrence of two or more endocrine tumours in a patient, and include
two major forms, characterized by development of tumours within specific
endocrine glands, referred to as type 1 (MEN1) and type 2 (MEN2). These
disorders are due to mutations in the MEN1 gene in MEN1 (parathyroid,
pituitary or pancreatic tumours), and in the RET gene in MEN2 (which
comprises  three  types:  MEN2A  with  medullary  thyroid  carcinomas,
pheochromocytomas, and hyperparathyroidism; MEN2B with medullary
thyroid carcinomas, pheochromocytomas, mucosal neuromas, ganglioneur-
omas  and  marfanoid  habitus;  and  isolated  familial  medullary  thyroid
carcinoma). Additionally, CDKN1B gene mutations are detected in MEN 4
(parathyroid and pituitary tumours), the rarest form of MEN diseases.
However, tumours occurring in MEN syndromes may also have a non-
endocrine  origin  such  as  lipomas  and  facial  angiofibromas  in  MEN1
syndrome. In addition, there are other hereditary endocrine syndromes in
which there is only one type of endocrine tumour occurring either in an
isolated  form
(familial  isolated  pituitary  adenomas)  or,  eventually,
associated  with  tumours  from  other  tissues
(hyperparathyroidism-jaw
tumour syndrome and paraganglioma/pheochromocytoma syndrome). On
the other hand, endocrine neoplasias may also be a component of hereditary
syndromes characterized by a predominance of non-endocrine tumours such
as Cowden syndrome, Carney complex, familial adenomatous polyposis or
von-Hippel-Lindau disease.
Hereditary endocrine neoplasias are usually inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait and are due to mutations in tumour suppressor genes, except
for MEN2/FMTC in which the causative gene, the RET gene, is a proto-
oncogene.
Individually, each of these syndromes has a low incidence/prevalence but,
due to their multiplicity, Endocrinologists, in particular those working in
referral centers for endocrine tumours, are frequently requested to evaluate
and treat patients with such neoplasias.
Illustrative  cases  of  some  of  these  syndromes  will  be  presented  and
discussed in this MTE session.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.MTE6
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
MTE7
New ATA recommendation for differentiated thyroid cancer
management from the point of view of European endocrinologist
Furio Pacini
Italy.
The American Thyroid Association has recently developed updated guidelines for
the management of thyroid nodules and thyroid cancer. Compared to previous
editions, this new guidelines give important new recommendation on several
issues.
Initial  treatment  for  thyroid  cancer  is  total  thyroidectomy.  After  total
thyroidectomy, patients are treated with131I activities aimed at ablating any
remnant  thyroid  tissue.  Radioiodine  ablation  is  recommended  in  high-risk
patients and in some low risk patients, while there is no indication in very low risk
patients. The method of choice for preparation to perform a radioiodine ablation is
based on the administration of recombinant human TSH.
After thyroid ablation, aim of follow-up is the early discovery and treatment of
persistent or recurrent disease. At 6 to 12 months the follow-up is based on
physical examination, neck ultrasound, rhTSH stimulated serum Tg measure-
ment. At this time nearly 80% of the patients will belong to the low risk categories
and  will  disclose  normal  neck  ultrasound  and  undetectable
(!1.0 ng/ml)
stimulated serum Tg in the absence of serum Tg antibodies. These patients
may be considered in complete remission.
The few patients with persistent disease, require imaging techniques for the
localization of disease. Included in this category are the 5-10% of DTC patients
that presented with local or distant metastases at diagnosis and an additional
5-10% that develop recurrent disease during follow-up. When appropriately
treated, 2/3 of those patients with local disease and 1/3 of those with distant
disease may achieve complete remission. Lung macro-nodules may benefit from
radioiodine therapy but the definitive cure rate is very low. Bone metastases have
the worst prognosis. Whenever radioiodine therapy is not effective and the disease
progress, patients are candidate to treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors which
have been recently approved after successful outcome of several clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.MTE7
MTE8
Abstract unavailable.
MTE9
Treatment of male hypogonadism
Dimitrios G Goulis
Greece.
Traditionally, male hypogonadism is classified into hypogonadotrophic
(the
archetype being Kallmann syndrome) and hypergonadotrophic (the archetype
being Klinefelter syndrome). Late-onset hypogonadism
(LOH) constitutes a
separate entity that can be defined as the state where men of advanced age
demonstrate low serum testosterone (T) concentrations in combination with a
spectrum of symptoms reminiscent of those of ‘classic’ male hypogonadism (e.g.
reduced sexual function, loss of vigor, muscle weakness and depression). In obese
men, hypogonadism can further worsen the metabolic profile.
The  cornerstone  of  the  treatment  of  male  hypogonadism  is testosterone
replacement therapy (TRT) in the form of intramuscular injections or transdermal
preparations (gel, patches). Important TRT issues include:
† Indications (undisputable diagnosis of hypogonadism).
† Contra-indications (absolute: prostate cancer breast cancer; relative: sleep
apnea syndrome, benign prostate hyperplasia with obstructive symptoms).
† Adverse effects (polycythemia, prostate hyperplasia, gynecomastia, alteration
of serum lipid profile, liver toxicity, impairment of spermatogenesis).
† Follow-up  program
[recording  of  clinical
(e.g.  symptom  improvement
including sexual function, natural history of sleep apnea, blood pressure,
digital rectal examination) and biochemical (e.g. PSA, fasting lipid profile,
complete blood count, liver function tests) parameters on pre-determined time
intervals].
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
TRT is expected to re-establish sexual functioning and libido, improve mood and
muscle mass, prevent osteoporosis and maintain mental acuity and virilization. A
most debated issue is that TRT in LOH. Despite the evidence TRT may increase
the incidence of cardiovascular disease, a critical review of the available literature
suggests that TRT is effective and safe treatment for male hypogonadism, when
applied  in  carefully  selected  populations.  In  symptomatic  men  with  LOH,
metabolic  impairment  and  obesity,  the  combination  of  TRT  with  lifestyle
modifications can result in better outcomes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.MTE9
MTE10
Systems medicine: the impact on endocrine practice
Eugenia Resmini
Spain.
Systems Medicine is an interdisciplinary field of study that deals with systems of
the human body as part of an integrated whole, incorporating biochemical,
physiological, and environment interactions. Systems Medicine draws on systems
science and systems biology, and considers complex interactions within the
human body with a patient’s genomics, behavior and environment perspective.
The earliest uses of the term systems medicine appeared in 1992, it is a modern
approach which produces improvement of patient health through systems-based
approaches and practice.
A distinctive challenge of Systems Medicine is that it means different things for
different  people  and  that  different  societies  and  communities  use  different
approaches and languages.
Clinicians always have integrated clinical observation, empirical knowledge and
information from medical tests in order to diagnose and treat patients. This is a
proven  and  successful  concept.  However,  the  success  of  this  approach  is
challenged by the steep increase in the amount of different pieces of information
to integrate and the sheer size and complexity of large datasets, such as genome
sequences, which we are able to produce. Computational and mathematical
analysis and modeling methods used in Systems Medicine offer a unique and
effective opportunity to fill this gap. These methods open new horizons and will
extend medicine’s ability to help by harnessing an enormous amount of patient
and disease relevant information that is available and will become available in the
future. Systems Medicine provides a systematic and tractable approach that is
reproducible, scalable and evolvable, ensuring that the increasing volume of
highly complex patient data will be accessible and intelligible. Systems Medicine
will give clinicians a new tool that will step change the capabilities of the clinician
to  diagnose  and  treat  patients  faster,  better  and  more  effectively.  The
Coordinating  Action  Systems  Medicine
(CASyM)  is  a  multidisciplinary
European consortium that joins forces to develop an implementation strategy
for Systems Medicine. This new and innovative concept integrates multiple
disciplines, whereas a significant part of this is clinical medicine, from clinical
trials through public health and medical economics. The CASyM road map is
driven by clinical needs: It aims to identify areas where a systems approach will
address clinical questions and solve clinical problems. The Instituto de Salud
Carlos III (Institute of Health Carlos III, ISCIII) is the main Public Research
Entity funding, managing and carrying out biomedical research in Spain. The
Institute has been conducting research and providing key services in the life and
health sciences for over 20 years. It is also the responsible for managing Spain’s
Health Research and Development Strategy. Its key mission is to support the
development of scientific knowledge in the health sciences and to contribute to
innovation in healthcare and the prevention of disease throughout Systems
Medicine. Putting patients at the heart of all its activities and objectives, the
Institute promotes and coordinates biomedical research and provides scientific
and  technical  services  of  the  highest  quality  in  partnership  with  all  the
organizations forming part of the Spanish System of Science, Technology and
Innovation. In order to create a network of research excellence, it created the
Centros de Investigación Biomédica en Red (Biomedical Research Networking
Centre, ‘CIBER’) by setting up consortia, with their own legal personality, which
are designed to conduct research on a specific broadly defined disease or health
problem. CIBER are formed through the association of research groups linked to
the National Health System to help form the scientific basis of the programs and
policies of the National Health System. The purpose of creating and maintaining
CIBER is to promote research excellence in biomedicine and health sciences
conducted in the National Health System and in the system of science and
technology. Systems Medicine is an appealing concept, it still is in the phase of its
active development and not implemented in clinical practice. For this reason
clinical needs and opportunities for the implementation of Systems Medicine
in clinical endocrinology will be discussed. The aim of the discussion will be
to explore innovative approaches in the characterization and management of
endocrine disorders, where new discoveries and new technologies are challenging
scientists for the development of research, as well as for the clinical practice.
Participants will be asked for their main field of expertise and any present and/or
previous experience in the Systems Medicine area. Moreover, their interest
toward Systems Medicine and their feeling about the add-on value of Systems
Medicine in their own area of research and in general, will be evaluated. Types of
Systems Medicine based applications which are more appealing in clinical
endocrinology would be identified. Targeted therapies, clinical trials, neuroendo-
crine databases, diabetes and quality of life emerged as very appealing for System
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Medicine in clinical endocrinology. Systems approaches may also fulfill the
unmet needs which include the necessity of prognostic parameters, validated
treatment  algorithms,  identification  of  pathway-specific  compounds  and
identification of patient heterogenei
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.MTE10.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Oral Communications
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Adrenal - Basic & Clinical
OC1.1
Genetic landscape of sporadic unilateral adrenocortical adenomas
without PRKACA p.Leu206Arg mutation
Cristina Ronchi1, Guido Di Dalmazi2, Silviu Sbiera1, Guillaume Assie3,
Isabel Weigand1, Davide Calebiro5, Silke Appenzeller6,7, Beatrice Rubin8,
Jens Waldmann9, Carla Scaroni8, Detlef Bartsch9, Franco Mantero8,
Massimo Mannelli10, darko Kastelan11, Iacopo Chiodini12,
Jerome Bertherat3, Martin Reincke2, Tim Strom4, Martin Fassnacht1,7 &
Felix Beuschlein2
1Department of Internal Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes Unit,
University Hospital of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany;2Medizinische
Klinik and Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich,
Germany;3Endocrinology, Cochin Institute, INSERM U1016, Paris,
France;4Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, France;5Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology and Bio-
Imaging Center/Rudolf Virchow Center, University of Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany;6Core Unit Systems Medicine, University of
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany;7Comprehensive Cancer Center Main-
franken, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany;8Endocrinology
Unit, University Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy;9Department of Visceral,
Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital Giessen and Marburg,
Marburg, Germany;10Endocrinology Unit, Department of Experimental and
Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy;
11Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital Centre Zagreb,
Zagreb, Croatia;12Units of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases,
Fondazione IRCCS Cá Granda-Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
Genetic alterations affecting the PKA/cAMP pathway are commonly found in
cortisol-producing adrenocortical adenomas (ACAs), while activating mutations
in the gene coding for b-catenin (CTNNB1) have been reported in both adenomas
and carcinomas. However, the molecular pathogenesis of most ACAs is still
unclear. Aim of the study was a comprehensive genetic characterization of
sporadic ACAs and the identification of novel molecular markers involved in
adrenal tumorigenesis and steroid autonomy.
Whole-exome sequencing was performed on DNA of adrenocortical tumors and
corresponding blood samples of 99 patients with ACAs (39 associated with overt
Cushing’s syndrome, 35 with subclinical hypercortisolism and 25 endocrine
inactive) negative for the p.Leu206Arg PRKACA mutation.
In total, 706 protein-altering somatic mutations were detected in 88/99 ACAs
(median: 6 mutations per sample, range: 0-55). Several altered genes could be
recognized as part of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway (CTNNB1, APC, APC2, PKP2,
and different members of the protocadherin superfamily), being associated with
larger tumor size and endocrine inactivity. Moreover, many components of the
cAMP/PKA pathway were affected by somatic mutations, including three new
mutations in the PRKACA gene, mutations in metabotropic glutamate receptors
(GRM3,  GRM4,  GRM6)  and  others  (GNAS,  PRKACA,  PRKAR1A,  CREB1,
CREBBP,  ADCY3),  and  associated  with  female  gender  and  overt  Cushing
syndrome. Finally, more surprisingly, we also observed several alterations in
genes involved in the Ca2C  signaling (CACNA1C, CACNA1E, RYR1, RYR2,
RYR3, GRIA1, GRID1, GRIK2, GRIN1, GRIN3B, GRIP1, GRIA2).
In conclusion, this study represents the most comprehensive genetic character-
ization of unilateral ACAs, including inactive adenomas. We thereby identified
somatic alterations affecting signaling pathways known or potentially involved in
the adrenal tumorigenesis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC1.1
OC1.2
Focal DNA methylation measurement in adrenocortical carcinoma is a
prognostic marker independent from tumor stage and Ki67; an ENSAT
study
Guillaume Assie1,2, Anne Jouinot1, Rossella Libe1,2, Martin Fassnacht3,
Silviu Sbiera3, Cristina Ronchi3, Ronald De Krijger4,6, Jens Waldmann7,
Marcus Quinkler8, Antoine Tabarin9, Olivier Chabre10, Franco Mantero12,
Massimo Mannelli11, Véronique Kerlan13, Lionel Groussin1,12,
Eric Baudin14, Felix Beuschlein15, Eric Clauser5, Joel Coste16 &
Jérôme Bertherat1,2
1Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Paris Descartes
University, Paris, France;2Department of Endocrinology, Assistance
Publique 
˛ pitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France;3Endocrinology
and Diabetes Unit, University Hospital of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany;
4Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands;5Department of Oncogenetics, Assistance
Publique 
˛ pitaux de Paris, 
˛ pital Cochin, Paris, France;6Department of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Pathology, Reinier de Graaf Hospital, Delft, The Netherlands;7Department
of Surgery, University Hospital Giessen and Marburg, Marburg, Germany;
8Department of Medicine, Charite University, Berlin, Germany;9Depart-
ment of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University
Hospital of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France;10Department of Endocrinology,
University Hospital of Grenoble, Grenoble, France;11Department of
Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy;12Department of Medicine, Endocrinology Unit, University
of Padova, Padova, Italy;13Department of Endocrinology, Brest University
Hospital, Brest, France;14Department of Nuclear Medicine and Endocrine
Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France;15MedizinischeKlinik
und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-UniversitatMänchen, Mänchen,
Germany;16Biostatistics and Epidemiology Unit, HôtelDieu, Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
Recent pan-genomic analyses of tumor DNA identified specific patterns of DNA
methylation -e.g. CpG islands hypermethylation in the promoter regions of
genes-  as  pejorative  prognostic  markers  in  adrenocortical  cancer
(ACC).
Integrated genomics clearly shows that ACC with such an hypermethylation
belongs to specific subgroups of ACC with increased driver genes alterations and
a poor survival.
Aim
To confirm the prognostic value of this methylation pattern on an independent
cohort using a commercially available kit, and to confront methylation to tumor
stage and Ki67, the two main prognostic factors validated so far.
Patients and Methods
DNA  methylation  was measured  by  methylation-specific  multiplex-ligation-
dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) in the CpG islands of 27 genes using
the ME002-B1 kit (MRC-Holland). MS-MLPA marker was set up in a training
cohort of 50 ACC, then validated in an independent cohort of 203 ACC from 21
ENSAT centers. The validation  cohort included 64%  females, median  age
50 years, 80% localized tumors (ENSAT stages I-III). Univariate and multivariate
survival analyses were performed with Cox models.
Results
The mean methylation of 4 genes (PAX5, GSTP1, PYCARD, PAX6) correlated
well with methylation arrays (Pearson correlation coefficient 0.81). The mean
methylation was a strong predictor of survival, with a hazard ratio (HR) for
recurrence of 1.013 (P!10K6) and a HR for death of 1.012 (P!10K4) per 1%
increase of methylation. In a multivariate model including ENSAT stage and
Ki67, the mean methylation remained significant for predicting recurrence (P!
10K3) and death (P!10K3).
Conclusion
Focal measurement of tumor DNA methylation is a high and independent
predictor  of  recurrence  and  death  in  ACC  patients.  MS-MLPA  is  readily
compatible with clinical routine, and should therefore complete the clinical and
pathological prognostic markers for precision medicine.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC1.2
OC1.3
Hormone replacement therapy with prednisolone is associated with a
worse lipid profile than replacement with hydrocortisone in patients
with adrenal insufficiency: a matched analysis of data from the EU-AIR
Marcus Quinkler1, Bertil Ekman2, Claudio Marelli3, Sharif Uddin4,
Pierre Zelissen5 & Robert Murray6
1
Endocrinology in Charlottenburg, Berlin, Germany;2Department of
Endocrinology and Department of Medical and Health Sciences, Linkoping
University, Linkoping, Sweden;3Shire International GmbH, Zug,
Switzerland;4Shire, Lexington, Massachusetts, USA;5Department of
Internal Medicine and Endocrinology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands;6Department of Endocrinology, Leeds Teaching
Hospitals NHS Trust, St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, UK.
Introduction
Prednisolone  is  the  standard  treatment  for  most  inflammatory  conditions.
However, it is also used in hormone replacement therapy in adrenal insufficiency
(AI) for historical reasons or due to its longer half-life and once-daily application.
Recent data indicate that daily prednisolone could be associated with lower bone
mineral density than daily hydrocortisone in patients with AI. However, data on
risk  factors  for  cardiovascular  disease  in  patients  with  AI  treated  with
prednisolone are scarce, despite cardiovascular disease being the major cause
of death in patients with AI. Therefore, we analyzed real-world data from the
European Adrenal Insufficiency Registry (EU-AIR).
Design
EU-AIR with 19 centres across Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and the UK
started enrolling patients with AI in August 2012. Patients on dexamethasone or
modified-release  hydrocortisone  were  excluded  from  this  analysis,  as  were
patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Patients receiving prednisolone (3-6
mg/day) or hydrocortisone (15-30 mg/day) were included, resulting in 50 patients
on prednisolone and 909 on hydrocortisone. We performed a 1:3 matching
regarding sex, age, duration of disease and aetiology of AI.
Results
After matching, we found significantly higher total cholesterol (6.3G1.6 vs 5.4G
1.1 mmol/l; P!0.05) and LDL levels (3.9G1.4 vs 3.2G1.0 mmol/l; P!0.05) in
47 patients on prednisolone compared to 141 patients on hydrocortisone. HbA1c,
HDL and triglyceride levels were not different between groups, neither were BMI
(27.2G3.9 vs 27.8G5.3 kg/m2), systolic and diastolic blood pressure (128G
18/78G9 vs 131G18/79G10 mmHg), and waist circumference (99.0G13.8 vs
96.1G13.9 cm). No differences in the frequency of hypertension or diabetes
mellitus were detected between groups.
Conclusions
This is the first matched analysis comparing cardiovascular risk factors in patients
with AI on prednisolone and hydrocortisone. Significantly higher LDL levels in
patients treated with prednisolone than hydrocortisone could predict a higher
relative risk of cardiovascular disease for these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC1.3
OC1.4
Urine steroid metabolomics is a highly sensitive tool for post-operative
recurrence detection in adrenocortical carcinoma
Vasileios Chortis1,2, Irina Bancos1,2, Alice J Sitch3, Angela E Taylor1,2,
Donna O’Neil1,2, Katharina Lang1,2, Marcus Quinkler4, Massimo Terzolo5,
Massimo Mannelli6, Dimitra Vassiliadi7, Urszula Ambroziak8, M.
Conall Dennedy9, Mark Sherlock10, Jerome Bertherat11, Felix Beuschlein12,
Martin Fassnacht13, Jonathan J Deeks3, Michael Biehl14 & Wiebke Arlt1,2
1Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK;2Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism,
Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham, UK;3Institute of Applied
Health, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK;4Endocrinology in
Charlottenburg, Berlin, Germany;5University of Turin, Turin, Italy;
6Unversity of Florence, Florence, Italy;7Attikon Hospital, Athens, Greece;
8University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland;9University of Galway, Galway,
Ireland;10Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland;11Rene Descartes University,
Paris, France;12Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich,
Germany;13University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany;14University
of Groningen, Gronigen, The Netherlands.
Context
Adrenocortical  carcinoma
(ACC)  is  an  aggressive  malignancy  with  high
recurrence rates. Regular post-operative follow-up imaging is essential, but
associated with high radiation exposure and frequent diagnostic ambiguity. Urine
steroid metabolomics has been described as a novel diagnostic tool for the
detection of adrenocortical malignancy. Here we present the first clinical study
assessing the performance of this innovative approach in the follow-up of patients
with complete (R0) ACC resection.
Patients and Methods
We included 142 ACC patients from 13 centres registered with the European
Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumours (ENSAT). We selected all patients
recorded 2008-2015 fulfilling the following criteria: 1) recorded on the ENSAT
registry as confirmed ACC with R0 primary tumour resection; 2) availability of at
least two postoperative 24-hour urines, one whilst disease-free and the other after
recurrence. The urine steroid metabolome was analysed by gas chromatography-
mass  spectrometry,  with  quantification  of
38
distinct  steroid  metabolites.
Biochemical detection of ACC recurrence was judged both by expert review
and a machine learning-based computational algorithm.
Results
Recurrent disease was detected by imaging in 28 of 142 patients after a median of
21
(IQR 5-28) months following R0  resection. Steroid metabolome analysis
diagnosed disease recurrence at the time of first abnormal imaging or earlier in
19/28 cases. The sensitivity of this approach was highest in patients who had
provided  a  pre-operative  urine  sample
(10/11
cases  diagnosed  correctly).
Similarly, ACC recurrence was detected correctly in 11/12 patients not receiving
adjuvant mitotane. By contrast, in patients on adjuvant mitotane, and hence
downregulated global steroidogenesis, sensitivity was reduced (8/16 detected). In
8 patients, biochemical  recurrence  detection pre-dated the first radiological
evidence of recurrence by O2 (range 3-10) months.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Our study provides proof-of-principle evidence for urine steroid metabolomics as
a sensitive diagnostic tool for the prediction of ACC recurrence following R0
resection.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC1.4
OC1.5
Is biochemical assessment of pheochromocytoma necessary in adrenal
incidentalomas with magnetic resonance features non-suggestive of
pheochromocytoma?
Idris Kuzu1, Sayid Shafi Zuhur2, Alper Ozel1,3, Feyza Yener Ozturk1 &
Yuksel Altuntas1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Sisli Etfal Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Namik Kemal University, Faculty of Medicine, Tekirdag,
Turkey;3Department of Radiology, Sisli Etfal Training and Research
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Objective
It is not currently well known whether pheochromocytomas can be ruled out
based on low intensity on T2-weighted sequences and signal loss on out-off phase
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequences. Hence, in this study we aimed to
investigate whether biochemical screening for pheochromocytoma in patients
with  adrenal  incidentalomas
(AI)  showing  MRI  features  not  suggesting
pheochromocytoma would prove beneficial.
Methods
We performed MRI for 300 adrenal incidentalomas in 278 consecutive patients.
All patients were screened for pheochromocytoma with plasma metanephrine and
normetanephrine.  Patients  with  high  plasma  levels  of  metanephrine  and
normetanephrine  were  also  assessed  for  pheochromocytoma  by  urinary
metanephrines.
Results
Hyperintensity was detected on T2-weighted MRI sequences in 28 (9.3%) of the
300 AI. Among these 28 incidentalomas, pheochromocytoma was diagnosed in
13
(46.4%) of the cases by histopathological analysis. Hyperintensity on T2-
weighted MRI was significantly higher in pheochromocytomas compared to the
remaining AI (P!0.001). All 13 pheochromocytomas were characterized with
hyperintensity on T2-weighted sequences and the absence of signal loss on out-
of-phase sequences on MRI. Pheochromocytoma was not detected in any of the
272
AI,  which  appeared  hypointense  or  isointense  on  T2-weighted  MRI
sequences and in 250 cases with signal loss on out-of-phase sequences.
Conclusion
The results of this study suggest that AI, which appear hypointense or isointense
on T2-weighted MRI sequences and those with signal loss on out-of-phase
sequences, may not require routine biochemical screening for pheochromocy-
toma. Further studies including a higher number of pheochromocytomas are
required to confirm our results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC1.5
Receptors & Signalling
OC2.1
3-T1AM signaling in the rat thyrocyte cell line PCCL3
Nancy Schanze1, Noushafarin Khajavi2, Stefan Mergler3,
Heike Biebermann2 & Josef Kohrle1
1Institut fur Experimentelle Endokrinologie, Charité - Universitatsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany;2Institut fur Experimentelle Pädiatrische
Endokrinologie, Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany;
3Experimentelle Ophthalmologie, Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
The  endogenous  decarboxylated  thyroid  hormone
(TH)  metabolite
3-Iodothyronamine (3-T1AM) exerts partially TH antagonistic effects in rodents
and was shown to suppress the hypothalamic pituitary thyroid axis in rats after
single dose application. Therefore, it might play a role in maintaining TH
homoeostasis. Among the molecular targets of 3-T1AM are G protein-coupled
receptors like the trace amine associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) and adrenergic
receptors.  Furthermore,
3-T1AM  was  shown  to  activate  the  cold-sensitive
transient receptor potential melastatin 8 channel (TRPM8). By acting on these
target structures 3-T1AM modulates cAMP and Ca2C  signaling in several cell
lines in vitro. We recently obtained experimental evidence that 3-T1AM (1 mM
for 1 - 3 h) interferes with the TH synthesis machinery and energy metabolism in
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
the rat thyrocyte cell line PCCL3. To elucidate the mechanism underlying these
effects we analyzed the activation of signaling pathways by 3-T1AM and well
established receptor ligands in PCCL3 cells. Levels of cAMP were measured with
a competitive assay and cytosolic free Ca2C  was analyzed with the calcium
indicator fura-2/AM and fluorescence imaging. 3-T1AM (0.1 - 1 mM) incubation
did neither modify basal nor TSH-stimulated cAMP concentration. Incubation of
PCCL3 cells with phenylethylamine or norepinephrine/isoprenaline, endogenous
ligands of TAAR1 and adrenergic receptors, respectively, left cAMP unaltered
indicating absent expression or functional inertness of the receptors to these
agents. In contrast, 3-T1AM induced a strong increase in cytosolic free calcium in
PCCL3 cells within minutes, which was abolished by co-incubation with the
TRPM8 blocker BCTC. In conclusion, Ca2C  signaling via TRPM8 rather than
TAAR1- or adrenergic receptor-dependent cAMP signaling is considered as a
candidate mechanism that might mediate the metabolic and functional effects of
3-T1AM in PCCL3 cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC2.1
OC2.2
Expression levels of thyroglobulin processing proteases are reduced
upon trace amine-associated receptor 1 deficiency in mice
Joanna Szumska1, Zaina Batool1, Maria Qatato1, Emily Melisa
Ullrich Gavilanes1, Vladislav Skripnik1, Nita Shillova1, David K. Grandy2
& Klaudia Brix1
1Jacobs University, Bremen, Germany;2Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
The function of the thyroid gland is to maintain thyroid hormone (TH) levels in
the blood circulation. Thyroid epithelial cells liberate TH from the precursor
molecule thyroglobulin (Tg) by the combined proteolytic action of the cathepsin
B, K, L, and S. Cathepsin L-deficiency in mice results in impaired processing of
Tg and remnants of dead cells in the follicle lumen. Recently, we have shown that
Trace amine-associated receptor 1 (Taar1) is localized on the primary cilia of
mouse  thyrocytes.  Interestingly,  Taar1-deficient  mice  are  characterized  by
remnants of dead cells in the follicle lumen; a phenotype shared with cathepsin
L-deficient mice. Thus we investigated the possible link between expression and
function of Taar1 and the activity of cathepsins B, K, L and S in vitro and in vivo.
Pharmacological knock-down (Cathepsin L inhibitor III) of cathepsin L activity
in FRT cells resulted in reduced immunoreactivity of Taar1 on their primary cilia.
In mice (nZ6) lacking Taar1, the expression in situ of cathepsin B, D and L was
measured and cathepsin D and L expression levels were found to be reduced in 12
month old Taar1-deficient mice. We interpret these data to suggest that signalling
mediated by Taar1 on the cilia of thyrocytes is critical for thyrocyte maturation
and survival because it is involved in regulating the expression and activity of the
cathepsins  including  cathepsin  L  that  is  critical  to  thyrocyte  survival,  TH
processing and follicle maturation.
Supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft in the framework of SPP
1629/2, BR 1308/11-1, and 11-2.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC2.2
OC2.3
PRKACA mutations in adrenal Cushing impair association with the
PKA regulatory subunit
Kerstin Bathon1,2, Isabel Weigand4, Cristina L. Ronchi3, Guido Di
Dalmazi5, Felix Beuschlein5, Silviu Sbiera4, Martin Fassnacht3,4 &
Davide Calebiro1,2
1Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Wurzburg, Germany;2Rudolf
Virchow Center, DFG-Research Center for Experimental Biomedicine,
Wurzburg, Germany;3Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken,
Wurzburg, Germany;4Department of Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes
Unit, Wurzburg, Germany;5Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV,
Munich, Germany.
In a previous study we found mutations in the main catalytic subunit of protein
kinase  A
(PKA  Ca)  to  be  responsible  for  cortisol-secreting  adrenocortical
adenomas (ACAs). These mutations interfere with the formation of a stable
holoenzyme,  thus  causing  constitutive  PKA  activation.  More  recently,  we
identified additional mutations affecting PKA Ca in ACAs associated with
overt  Cushing  syndrome:  Ser213Arg_Leu212_Lys214insIle-Ile-Leu-Arg,
Cys200_Gly201insVal, Trp197Arg, del244-248CGlu249Gln, Glu32Val.
Here, we have performed a functional characterization of these new PKA Ca
mutations.  Specifically,  we  evaluated  the  basal  association  between  PKA
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
regulatory and catalytic subunits using co-immunoprecipitation as well as PKA
activity with a kemptide assay.
All analyzed mutations with the exception of Glu32Val showed a reduced
interaction with the regulatory (RIIb) subunit. The interaction with the regulatory
(RIa) subunit was affected also for all mutants except Glu32Val and Trp197Arg.
The control of cAMP on the dissociation of the regulatory and the catalytic
subunit  was  not  affected.  Two  mutations
(del244-248CGlu249Gln  and
Trp197Arg)  caused  an  increased  basal  PKA  activity.  Two  mutations
(Cys200_Gly201insVal  and  Ser213Arg_Leu212_Lys214insIle-Ile-Leu-Arg)
were  apparently  inactivating,  at  least  using  kemptide  as  a  substrate.  The
Glu32Val mutation did not affect the interaction with the regulatory subunit and
showed a slightly increased PKA activity.
These findings suggest that interference with the formation of a stable PKA
holoenzyme is a main mechanism leading to constitutive PKA activation in
cortisol-secreting ACAs. Further studies are required to investigate the biological
relevance and mechanisms of activation of the variants associated with decreased
PKA activity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC2.3
OC2.4
Link between cell cycle, steroidogenesis and PKA in adrenocortical
tumors cells
Marthe Rizk-Rabin1, Bruno Ragazzon1 & Jerôme Bertherat1,2
1INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Cochin Institute, Paris Descartes
University, Paris, France;2Department of Endocrinology, Center for Rare
Adrenal Diseases, Hôpital Cochin Paris France, Paris, France.
The cyclic AMP/PKA signalling cascade and PKA subunits are involved in the
pathogenesis of a subset of cortisol-secreting adrenocortical tumors (ACT). In
addition, steroid excess causes morbidity of all types of ACT.
The PKA regulatory subunits PRKARIA, PRKARIIb control proliferation/apop-
tosis in the H295R adrenocortical cell line. Their inactivation enhances the
accumulation of cells in the G2 phase, increases steroidogenesis and activates the
PKA and MAPkinases pathways.
The goal is to study the correlation between the cell cycle phases and the steroid
secretion, and its control by PKA in H295R cells.
Methods
Using pharmacologic drugs, cells were synchronized at specific cell cycle check
point
(G1  phase),
(S  phase)  and
(G2  phase).  We  analysed  the  cell  cycle
distribution (Cytometry), the expression, of cyclins and cdks, the PKA subunits
and cell signalling pathways, the expression of StAR and steroidogenic enzymes.
We studied the effect of PKA activation by PRKARIA inactivation and PRKACAa
overexpression along the cell cycle synchronization.
Results
The synchronization of H295R cells at G2 phase increased the expression of the
steroidogenic enzymes and steroid secretion. Arresting H295R in G1 phase
decreased the steroidogenic enzymes expression resulting in a decrease of cortisol
secretion. PKA subunits distribution and PKA activity were modulated during the
cell cycle progression.
Moreover the PRKARIA inactivation counteracted the decrease of steroidogenesis
by enhancing StAR/luc reporter gene activity only in cells arrest in G1 phase, and
enforced  their  progression  in  G2
phase.  While  PRKACAa  overexpression
increased the StAR/luc reporter gene activity, independently of the cell cycle
check point arrest.
In Conclusion; we have demonstrated a tight link between the cell cycle check
points and the regulation of steroidogenesis, where the PRKARIA subunit had a
role as a key regulator of cell cycle and steroidogenesis in low steroidogenic G1
phase arrested cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC2.4
OC2.5
11b-HSD1 is a regulator of brown adipose tissue function and mediates
stress adaptation in glucocorticoid excess
Craig Doig1, Stuart Morgan1, Andrew Philp1, Jeremy Tomlinson3,
Paul Stewart2 & Gareth Lavery1
1University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK;2University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK;3Oxford University, Oxford, UK.
Glucocorticoids (GC) are critical to stress adaptation but in excess (Cushing’s
syndrome) drive metabolic dysfunction. 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type
1(11b-HSD1) amplifies intracellular GC signaling with
11b-HSD1KO mice
protected from the side-effects of GC excess. Brown adipose tissue (BAT)
function  is  impaired  by  GC’s,  which  repress  UCP1
and  beta-adrenergic
stimulated thermogenesis. Identifying mechanisms regulating BAT function is
important as humans have metabolically useful BAT, with more active BAT
associated with enhanced energy dissipation. We postulated 11b-HSD1 plays a
novel role in controlling BAT GC exposure, moderating thermogenic capacity.
To test this 11b-HSD1KO mice were administered corticosterone over 4-weeks
mimicking GC excess and BAT function assessed. Cultured BAT adipocyte
energy metabolism was assessed measuring Oxygen consumption rates (OCR)G
GCGbeta-adrenergic  stimulation.  Profiling  by  qPCR  and  immunoblot  for
metabolic  and  mitochondrial  function  was  conducted.  GC  excess  increases
11b-HSD1 and impairs BAT in WT mice which display decreased UCP1 protein,
expression of BAT-specific markers (PGC1a, PPARg, TFAM), and reduced
OxPhos complexes content. Conversely, 11b-HSD1KO mice retained UCP1 to
untreated control levels, resisted suppression of BAT expression markers and
maintained  expression  of  OxPhos  complexes.  GC  exposed  primary  brown
adipocytes from 11b-HSD1KO resisted suppression of UCP1 and of BAT genes.
KO cells also demonstrated enhanced adaptation to cold stress at 308C. Also KO
cells have 30% higher basal OCR, which is not supressed by GC. Finally, beta-3
adrenergic stimulation of the BAT thermogenic program was enhanced in 11b-
HSD1KO by 20%, and again was not supressed by GCs. We show that 11b-HSD1
regulates  BAT  energy  metabolism  and  cell  autonomous  control  of  the
thermogenic program in response to cold stress and beta-adrenergic stimulation.
BAT may contribute to the metabolic derangements seen in GC excess through
suppression of its capacity to dissipate energy, suggesting inhibition of 11b-HSD1
in BAT in the context of Cushing’s syndrome may be beneficial.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC2.5
Diabetes prediction & complications
OC3.1
Identification of a spliceosome-associated fingerprint with potential to
predict development of type 2 diabetes in high-risk patients
Raúl M. Luque1, Manuel D. Gahete1, Mercedes del Rio-Moreno1,
Sergio Pedraza-Arévalo1, Antonio Camargo2, Javier Delgado-Lista2,
Francisco Gracia-Navarro1, Francisco Pérez-Jiménez2, José López-
Miranda2 & Justo P. Casta
˜o1
1Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of
Córdoba (UCO), Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía (HURS), Instituto
Maimónides de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC), CIBE,
Córdoba, Spain;2Lipids and Atherosclerosis Unit, IMIBIC, HURS, UCO
and CIBERobn, Córdoba, Spain.
Prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MetS) and type-2 Diabetes (T2D) is growing
dramatically worldwide. Loss of phenotypic flexibility, i.e. the difficulty to cope
with different stressors to maintain metabolic homeostasis, contributes critically
to the development of MetS/T2DM. Thus, it is essential to identify the key
modifiers of phenotypic plasticity that define an individual’s susceptibility to
develop T2DM. In this scenario, emerging evidence indicates that, under adverse
metabolic conditions, the splicing machinery is markedly dysregulated in many
tissues. We hypothesized that such a dysregulation could contribute to loss of
phenotypic flexibility, and, as gene expression pattern in PBMCs commonly
reflects disease-characteristic expression patterns, we reasoned that changes in
spliceosome components of PBMCs might serve as biosensor/early indicators of
MetS/T2D. To test this notion, expression of selected components of the major
(nZ13) and minor spliceosome (nZ4), and associated splicing factors (nZ28)
was evaluated in PBMCs from 40 patients, who were initially non-T2D but in
high-risk  to  develop  T2D,  and  had  suffered  a  prior  cardiovascular  event
(CORDIOPREV study). Actually, during the 3-year follow-up, 20 individuals
developed T2D and 20 did not (controls). PBMCs were isolated from basal and
4-h post-prandial blood, at the inclusion in the study and after 3-years. Results
revealed that initial expression of relevant splicing factors and spliceosome
components was altered in PBMCs from individuals who subsequently developed
T2D. However, the most remarkable changes were observed during the post-
prandial response, wherein expression of several splicing factors (e.g. Magoh,
SRSF2, SRSF4, Tra2beta) was drastically induced in T2D-developing individuals
compared to control patients, not developing T2D after 3-years of follow-up.
These results reveal the existence of pre-TD2 development-associated spliceo-
some alterations, which could be related to the loss of phenotypic flexibility, and
could help to predict, as a “splicing fingerprint”, development of T2D in high-risk
patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC3.1
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
OC3.2
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) stimulates Glucagon-
like peptide (GLP)-1 from human and mouse pancreatic islets partly via
alpha-cell-derived IL-6
Katharina Timper1,2, Elise Dalmas1, Erez Dror1, Sabine Rutti4,3,
Constanze Thienel1, Nadine S. Sauter1, Karim Bouzakri3, Benoit Bédat5,
Francois Pattou6, Julie Kerr-Conte6, Marianne Boni-Schnetzler1 &
Marc Y. Donath1
1Department of Biomedicine, Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, University Hospital and University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland;2Max-Planck-Institute for Metabolism Research, Cologne,
Germany;3CUM, Departement de Medecine Genetique & Development,
Geneva, Switzerland;4Département de Physiologie, Lausanne, Switzerland;
5Department of Surgery, Cell Isolation and Transplantation Center, Geneva
University Hospitals and University of Geneva School of Medicine, Geneva,
Switzerland;6University Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.
Introduction
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) induces the cytokine interleukin
(IL)-6 in adipocytes. IL-6 enhances insulin secretion from b-cells via L- and
a-cell-derived GLP-1.Therefore we hypothesized that GIP regulates Glucagon-
like peptide (GLP)-1 as well as glucose control via IL-6.
Methods/Design
Basic research study on isolated human and mouse pancreatic islets and FACS-
sorted human a-and b-cells that were treated with GIP in vitro. For in vivo
studies,  GIP  effects  on  GLP-1
and  insulin  secretion  as  well  as  glucose
homeostasis were evaluated in mouse models with pharmacologic and genetic
ablation of IL-6.
Results
GIP induced IL-6 in mouse and human pancreatic a-cells, leading to GLP-1 and
insulin secretion in pancreatic islets. This effect was impaired in the absence of
IL-6 and modulated by IL-1b which stimulated IL-6 but directly impaired GLP-1
production. Furthermore, inhibition of the sodium glucose transporter (SGLT)2
with dapagliflozin - enhanced GIP-induced GLP-1 release. In vivo, GIP increased
plasma  GLP-1
and  insulin,  and  improved  glucose  tolerance,  which  was
potentiated by lipopolysaccharide and strongly decreased in IL-6-deficient mice
or in the presence of a blocking anti-IL-6 antibody. In diabetic mice, IL-1b and
IL-6 were massively upregulated in isolated islets and GIP lost its effects on
glycaemia control and GLP-1 induction.
Conclusion
These data indicate that GIP induces GLP-1 and insulin via a-cell-derived IL-6,
and that this effect is modulated by IL-1b and SGLT2 inhibtion. During diabetes,
the prevailing inflammation may attenuate GIP effects. These findings further
support the concept that the immune system plays an integral role in the
regulation of metabolism in physiology and pathology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC3.2
OC3.3
Reproducibility of fasting and oral glucose tolerance test derived
parameters of glucose metabolism in non-diabetic postmenopausal
women.
Frederique Van de Velde1, Anneloor Dierickx2, Herman Depypere2,
Joris Delanghe3, Jean-Marc Kaufman1 & Bruno Lapauw1
1Department of Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium;
2Department of Gynaecology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium;
3Department of Clinical Biology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium.
Introduction
Given the importance of establishing a reliable diagnosis of impaired glucose
metabolism and diabetes mellitus (DM), knowledge on accurate and reproducible
parameters is needed. However, little is known on the reproducibility of fasting
and oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) derived parameters, especially with
respect to the 2-hour derived parameters.
Objectives
To determine reproducibility of parameters of glucose metabolism in a non-
diabetic postmenopausal population.
Materials and methods
Thirty seven non-diabetic postmenopausal women (54G3 years, BMI 24.9G
4.5 kg/m2) underwent two 75 g OGTTs with a 6 week interval. Serum C-peptide
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
and insulin were determined using the immunoanalyzer COBAS e411 (Roche).
Glucose was analysed by the hexokinase method (COBAS, Roche). Fructosamine
was  determined  on  the  P-modular
(Roche).  To  investigate  reproducibility,
coefficient of variation (CV), reported as median (Q1-Q3), was calculated and
compared using a Mann-Whitney U test. The least significant difference (LSD)
was calculated as t0:05=2:DFw    ðMSw
2=nÞ^ð0:5Þ.
Results
Fructosamine (CVZ1.98 (0.87-4.73)%, LSDZ8.53 mmol/l) and fasting glucose
(CVZ3.33(0.88-6.38)%,  LSDZ5.67 mg/dl)  showed  high  reproducibility.  In
contrast,  fasting  C-peptide
(CVZ9.27(5.07-13.14)%,  LSDZ0.40 mg/l)  and
fasting insulin (CVZ16.64(7.21-26.67)%, LSDZ3.46 mU/l) had low reprodu-
cibility  compared  to  fructosamine  and  fasting  glucose
(all  P!0.001).
Reproducibility of 2 h-glucose (CVZ8.53(3.79-17.21)%, LSDZ19.4 mg/dl),
2 h-C-peptide
(CVZ17.46(5.18-23.73)%,  LSDZ1.78 mg/l)  and
2 h-insulin
(CVZ25.13(17.51-49.19)%, LSDZ27.54 mU/l) were lower compared to fasting
values (all P!0.05). Time-dependent parameters, such as early insulinogenic
(CVZ23.34(13.50-42.86)%)  or  early  peptidogenic  index
(CVZ13.17(7.19-
38.12)%), generally showed lower reproducibility.
Conclusion
Whereas fasting parameters of glucose metabolism, especially fructosamine and
glucose, show high reproducibility in a non-diabetic postmenopausal population,
this is not the case for fasting insulin and particularly the 2-hour OGTT derived
parameters. This is clearly reflected in their respective LSD, which should be kept
in mind in both clinical practices as well as in interventional studies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC3.3
OC3.4
Association of neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio with vitamin D levels in
type 2 diabetes mellitus
Neslihan Soysal Atile1, Rıfat Yava¸2, Betul Ekiz Bilir1 & Bulent Bilir3
1Tekirdag State Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism Department,
Tekirdag, Turkey;2Tekirdag State Hospital, Internal Medicine Department,
Tekirdag, Turkey;3Namik Kemal University Faculty of Medicine, Internal
Medicine Department, Tekirdag, Turkey.
Introduction
Increased neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR) is an inflammatory marker and an
indicator of cardiovascular risk. Recent studies demonstrated that the NLR values
of the diabetic patients were significantly higher than the healthy controls.
Vitamin D (25OHD) deficiency has been associated with diabetes mellitus and
cardiovascular diseases. Studies established a significant negative correlation
between 25(OH)D and HbA1c levels. Aim of this study is to evaluate the
association between 25(OH)D status and inflammation by using NLR.
Methods
Diabetic  patients  who  admitted  to  our  outpatient  clinic  between  January-
December 2015 were assessed retrospectively. Patients with cardiac comorbidity
including hypertension, any acute or chronic inflammatory disorder and cigarette
smokers were excluded. A total of 248 cases (151 female, 97 male; mean age
55.81G8.86) were included in the study. Anthropometric and laboratory findings
were recorded. Patients were grouped according to 25(OH)D levels (Group 1Z
25(OH)D!30 ng/ml and group 2Z25(OH)DO30 ng/ml).
Results
Groups were age, sex and BMI-matched. Duration of diabetes were similar in
both groups (4.69G3.9 vs 6.33G5.62 years; PZ0.107). There is no association
between 25OHD and HbA1c levels (PZ0.854). Triglyceride levels were higher
(182.53G120.17 vs 151.44G58.00 mg/dl) and HDL levels were lower in group 1
(44.89G15.71 vs 49.73G12.69 mg/dl) but these differences didn’t reach the
statistical significance
(PZ0.11 and PZ0.06 respectively). In the 25(OH)D
insufficient group, NLR were significantly higher than the adequate group (2.05G
0.67 vs 1.59G0.42; PZ0.000).
Conclusion
Our results established higher NLR values in 25(OH)D insufficient diabetic
patients and emphasized the increased cardiovascular risk in 25(OH)D deficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC3.4
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
OC3.5
Improvement in diabetic neuropathy after metabolic surgery a
comprehensive electrophysiological follow up study
Eylem Cagiltay1, Alper Celik2, Nurten Adatepe Uzun3, Riza Sonkaya4,
Surendra Ugale5, Ayca Kayadibi2, Gulsum Zengin2, Deniz Buyukbozkirli2,
Turgut Adatepe6 & Mustafa Ertas7
1Department of Endocrinology, GATA Haydarpasa Training and Research
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;2Metabolic Surgery Clinic, Istanbul, Turkey;
3Department of Neurology, Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical
Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey;4Department of Neurology, GATA Haydarpasa
Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;5Kirloskar Hospital,
Bariatric & Metabolic Surgery Clinic, Hyderabad, India;6Istanbul
Education and Training Hospital, Outpatient Clinic, Electromyography
Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey;7Consultant Neurologist at Private Office,
Istanbul, Turkey.
Aim
In the present study, we aimed to analyze the incidence of diabetic neuropathy
(DN) via electrophysiological testing of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients
scheduled for laparoscopic diverted sleeve gastrectomy with ileal transposition
(DSIT). At a mean of 8 months after surgery, the electrophysiological tests were
repeated and differences in electrophysiological parameters were evaluated to
investigate  the  effects  of  the  operation  on  outcomes  related  to  diabetic
neuropathy.
Methods
This cross sectional, non-blinded, prospective, pilot study included 55 severely
diabetic non-responders, who fail to achieve adequate glycemic control despite
appropriate medical treatment. Autonomic tests including motor and sensory
nerve conduction studies (NCS), sympathetic skin response (SSR) and R-R
interval analysis of patients scheduled for metabolic surgical treatments were
performed  pre-  and  postoperatively.  The  differences  in  metabolic  and
electrophysiological parameters were also analyzed. SPSS 15.0 for windows
was used for statistical analysis. c2  test, a non-parametric test, was used to
analysis the difference in the data obtained from the all groups.
Results
Patients had mean diabetes duration of 13.4G7 years. Preoperative values of
mean HbA1c, body weight and Body Mass Index (BMI) were 9.6G2%, 94.0G
14.7 kg and 34.0G5.1 kg/m2  and decreased to 6.6G1%, 71.7G13.3 kg and
26.1G3.5 kg/m2 postoperatively (P!0.001, each). Preoperative NCS evaluation
revealed  presence  of  polyneuropathy  in
27
(49%)  individuals;  however,
postoperative NCS measures showed decreased distal conduction time in 61%,
increased response amplitudes in 40% and increased conduction velocity in 57%
of patients for motor nerves. As for sensory nerves, decreased distal conduction
time was found in 55% and increased response amplitudes in 57% of patients. In
addition, significant improvements were observed in the of SSR and R-R interval
analysis postoperatively.
Conclusion
Beyond the improvements in metabolic parameters and BMI in our diabetic
patients  who  underwent  DSIT,  we  also  observed  improved  NCS  results.
Improvement in NCS variables may be interpreted as a result of better glycemic
control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC3.5
Thyroid - Clinical
OC4.1
Additional measurement of hCG distinguishes physiological high-
normal thyroid function and reveals large differences in the risk of
developing preeclampsia
Tim Korevaar1,2, Eric Steegers1,2, Marco Medici1, Theo Visser1 &
Robin Peeters1,2
1Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;2The Generation
R Study Group, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Context
Preeclampsia is a leading cause of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality
worldwide, affecting 2-8% of all pregnancies. We have previously shown that
women with high-normal levels of FT4 during early pregnancy have a 2.1-fold
increased risk of preeclampsia - but there was no apparent association with low
TSH. However, the thyroid is stimulated by human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
during early pregnancy and therefore we hypothesized that women with high-
normal thyroid function due to high hCG levels would have a different risk of
preeclampsia as compared to women with high-normal thyroid function and
low hCG.
Design, Setting, and Participants
In 5153 women TSH, FT4, hCG and TPO-antibody levels were measured during
early pregnancy (!18th week). The association of high-normal FT4 (5th quintile)
or  low  TSH  with  preeclampsia  was  analysed  using  multivariable  logistic
regression stratified per 20.000 IU/l hCG (up to O60.000). All analyses were
adjusted for gestational and maternal age, smoking, education, ethnicity, parity,
BMI and fetal gender.
Results
The combination of high-normal FT4 levels with low hCG (!20.000 IU/l) was
associated with an 11.1-fold increased risk of preeclampsia (P!0.05).
The combination of low TSH with low hCG (!20.000 IU/l) was associated with
an increased risk of preeclampsia ranging between a 9.2-fold increased risk for
TSH !0.1 mU/l, to an 8.7-fold increased risk for TSH !5th percentile and to an
3.8-fold increased risk for TSH !0.4 mU/l (all P!0.05).
The combination of high-normal FT4 and hCG O 20.000 or low TSH and
hCGO20.000 was not associated with an increased risk of preeclampsia. All
analyses remained similar after exclusion of TPOAb positive women.
Conclusion
The additional measurement of hCG in women with high normal thyroid function
tests markedly improves the identification of women at high-risk of developing
preeclampsia. This is likely to be due to the fact that hCG measurements allow for
distinguishing physiologically high thyroid function caused by high hCG levels
from pathophysiological high thyroid function due to autonomous production
and/or TSH receptor stimulation antibodies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC4.1
OC4.2
Molecular fingerprint of experimental thyrotoxicosis on human
metabolism: combined metabolome and proteome study
Maik Pietzner1, Beatrice Engelmann2, Tim Kacprowski2, Janine Golchert2,
Anna-Luise Dirk3, Georg Homuth2, Elke Hammer2,4, Matthias Nauck1,4,
Henri Wallaschofski1, Thomas Munte5, Nele Friedrich1,4, Uwe Volker2,4 &
Georg Brabant3
1Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University
Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany;2Interfaculty Institute for
Genetics and Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald,
Greifswald, Germany;3Medical Clinic I, University of Lubeck, Lubeck,
Germany;4DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner
site Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany;5Department of Neurology,
University of Lubeck, Lubeck, Germany.
The functional state of the thyroid is usually determined by thyrotropin (TSH),
whose serum levels depend on circulating thyroid hormone (TH) levels. This
feedback mechanism is tightly controlled in the individual and contrasts broad
reference range for TSH in the general population, leading to the concept of
subclinical thyroid disease. We studied a model of experimental thyrotoxicosis in
humans employing an untargeted metabolome and proteome approach. This
allowed us to gain a comprehensive picture of TH action on human metabolism as
well as to derive metabolic surrogates for thyroid function.
Levothyroxine  was  prescribed  to  sixteen  healthy  young  men  at  a  dose  of
250 mg/day for 8 weeks. Plasma was samples were obtained every 4 weeks,
starting before the treatment and ending 8 week after stopping the application.
Mass spectrometry was used to determine protein and metabolite levels. Serum
free thyroxine
(FT4) concentrations were associated with metabolite/protein
levels by means of mixed-effect linear regression models in a subsampling
setting. Predictive character of a bio-molecule signature for thyrotoxicosis was
assessed  by  a  random  forest  via  a  two-stage  cross-validation  procedure,
separating training and validation.
Strong molecular alterations were observed despite no indication of clinical
symptoms. Metabolites and proteins were affected to a similar amount (w60
each). TH action on lipid and amino acid metabolism could be confirmed and
extended. Novel findings included a strong, positive association with g-glutamyl
amino acids. Significantly associated proteins were aggregated into pathways and
revealed established TH targets, e.g. coagulation cascade and apolipoproteins, but
also novel associations related to the complement system. A signature of 15
metabolites/proteins attained promising (AUCZ0.86) discrimination between
thyrotoxicosis and euthyroidism.
The use of untargeted OMICS approaches allowed us to reveal novel pathways of
TH action and possess ability to identify new molecular signatures, beyond TSH
and FT4, for diagnosis and treatment of thyroid disorders.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC4.2
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
OC4.3
Antibodies against human eye muscle tissue fractions bind to type 2
5’deiodinase and inhibit the lymphocyte MAPK activation derived from
hyperthyroid patients with Graves’ disease
Ildikó Molnár1, József A Szentmiklósi2 & Éva Somogyiné-Vári1
1EndoMed, Immunoendocrinology and Osteoporosis Centre, Debrecen,
Hungary;2Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, University
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
Type 2 5’-deiodinase (DIO2) is a common enzyme between thyroid and eye
muscle tissues involving in T4  conversion to T3. The role of DIO2 has been
demonstrated in the development of skeletal muscle. Increased DIO2 activities
was connected to eye muscle enlargements in hyperthyroid Graves’ ophthalmo-
pathy. In this study, the presence of antibodies against human eye muscle tissue
fractions with the binding to DIO2 peptide was investigated and measured their
inhibiting  effects  on  lymphocyte  mitogen-activated  protein  kinase
(MAPK)
activation.
Antibodies against DIO2 peptide (aa 123-143) and human eye muscle membrane
(EyeM) and cytosol (EyeC) fractions were measured in 74 patients with Graves’
disease and 32 controls using ELISA assay. Thyroid hormones and antibiodies
against thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin were detected by chemilimunes-
cence assay. TSH receptor antibodies and MAPK activation were measured by
radio-immune assays.
Hyperthyroid Graves’ patients without ophthalmopathy (nZ30) showed more
frequent binding to DIO2 peptide than patients with ophthalmopathy (nZ23): 5
cases (37.5%) vs none for anti-EyeM IgG out of 8; 6 cases (20%) vs none for anti-
EyeC IgG out of 30; P!0.02; 3 cases (25%) vs none for anti-EyeC IgM out of 12.
Correlation was demonstrated between anti-EyeM IgG (P!0.01, rZ0.3507) or
anti-EyeC  IgM  (P!0.02,  rZ0.3178)  and  anti-DIO2  peptide  antibodies.  In
hyperthyroidism, anti-DIO2 peptide antibodies correlated positively with TSH
(P!0.01, rZ0.3498) and inversely with FT4  (P!0.05, rZK0.2757) levels.
Hyper-thyroid Graves’ patient sera with cross reactivity to DIO2 peptide inhibited
lymphocyte MAPK activations after 0 and 120 minutes compared with those
using control sera.
The results highlighted a cross reactivity between anti-EyeM or -EyeC and anti-
DIO2 peptide antibodies. Anti-DIO2 peptide antibodies demonstrated inverse
correlation  with  FT4
levels  and  inhibited  lymphocyte  MAPK  activations.
Therefore, anti-DIO2 peptide antibodies may be responsible for lower FT4 levels
via decreased MAPK activation highlighting their protective roles against the
development of ophthalmopathy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC4.3
OC4.4
Thyroid function and glucose metabolism in adults after hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation
Delia Bogdanet2, Brendan O’Kelly1, Aidan Stankard2, Nicola Fortune1,
Patrick Hayden1 & Marie Louise Healy1
1St. James’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;2Galway University Hospital,
Galway, Ireland.
Aim
Endocrine and metabolic disorders are among the most common complications in
survivors after hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). The aim of this study
was to evaluate thyroid function and glucose metabolism in patients treated with
HSCT.
Material and methods
This was a retrospective study which included 257 adult patients (173 males and
84 females) who underwent allogeneic HSCT between 2002 and 2014 in an Irish
University Hospital. All patients were preconditioned with chemotherapy and
total body irradiation (TBI). 121 patients received HSCT from unrelated donor,
with 52.9% receiving HCST from related donors. Thyroid function was assessed
early post HSCT (0-3 months), in the intermediate period (3-12 months) and late
post HSCT (O12 months) with screening for diabetes at a median of 10 months
(S.D. 18.21)
Results
The median age at diagnosis was 33 years (SD 10.45), with a median age at
treatment of 35.3 years old (S.D. 10.27). The most common indication for HSCT
was acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (39.68%) and the most used preconditioning
regime was TBI/Cyclophosphamide (90.27%). 25 patients had thyroid function
assessment in the early period of whom 32% had thyroid dysfunction. In the
intermediate period, 86 patients were assessed, 19.76% of whom had thyroid
abnormalities. In the late period, 172 patients had thyroid function assessment
with 38.95% having an abnormal test. The 2 most frequent abnormalities were
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
subclinical hypothyroidism, and a low FT4 with an inappropriately low or normal
TSH. 45 patients had HbA1c testing, with 48.88% being diagnosed with diabetes
(HbA1cO6.5%) and 11.11% with pre-diabetes.
Conclusion
Our study provides evidence that the incidence of thyroid dysfunction and glucose
metabolism abnormalities is higher post HSCT than in the general population.
This emphasizes the need for long term screening for thyroid dysfunction and
diabetes in the post HSCT population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC4.4
OC4.5
Risk factors of relapse in Graves’ disease? Results from a systematic
review and meta-analysis
Tristan Struja, Hannah Fehlberg, Alexander Kutz, Larissa Gubelin,
Christian Degen, Beat Muller & Philipp Schutz
Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism, Kantonsspital
Aarau, Medical University Clinic, Aarau, Aargau, Switzerland.
Context
Identification of risk factors predicting relapse in patients with hyperthyroidism of
Graves’ disease after the first cycle with standard thyreostatic therapy [ATD] is
important to guide therapeutic options.
Objective
We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to study predictors for risk
of relapse after the first treatment episode with ATD in patients with Graves’
disease induced hyperthyroidism.
Data sources
Based on a pre-specified protocol, we searched PubMed, EMBASE and Cochrane
in  July
2015  for  case-control,  controlled,  and  randomized-controlled  trials
analyzing risk factors for relapse after ATD treatment. The endpoint was relapse
of disease until follow-up.
Data extraction
PRISMA and SIGN statements were used for reviewing the data and assessing
quality of included trials.
Data synthesis
We included 54 trials with totally 8206 participants. Most trials were small with
moderate to high risk for bias. Gene data were only qualitatively assessed. 31
trials were assessed quantitatively. There were 2053 relapses in 4398 patients. By
random-effects meta-analysis (standardized mean difference - Hedges’ g; 95%
CI) orbitopathy (1.16; 1.08; 1.25), goiter (0.18; 0.07; 0.30), smoking (1.13; 1.02;
1.25), thyroid volume by sonography (K0.58; K0.90; K0.18), fT4 (K0.16;
K0.28; K0.05), tT3 (K0.25; K0.46; K0.04), TRAb (K0.33; K0.62; K0.04),
TBII (K0.36; K0.63; K0.09), TSAb (K0.26; K0.45; K0.06) did show a
significant predictive value, whereas male (1.08; 1.0; 1.18) or female (0.98; 0.93;
1.02) sex, age (0.14; K0.07; 0.35), and tT4 (0.04; 0.23; 0.31) did not.
Conclusions
This analysis found several risk factors to predict relapse in Graves’ disease which
can  be  combined  in  a  risk  score.  Prospective  studies  should  evaluate  the
prognostic accuracy of such a score to guide treatment decisions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC4.5
Neuroendocrinology
OC5.1
The Drosophila AIP orthologue is essential for actin cytoskeleton
stabilisation and cell adhesion
Elena Daniela Aflorei1, Benjamin Klapholz2, Nina Moderau3,
Paulo Baptista-Ribeiro3, Nic Tapon4, Nick Brown2, Ralf Stanewsky5 &
Márta Korbonits1
1Centre for Endocrinology, Bart’s and the London School of Medicine,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK;2The Gurdon Institute and
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK;3Protein Dynamics and Cell Signalling
Laboratory, Centre for Tumour Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK;4Apoptosis and Proliferation Control
Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, London, UK;
5Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biosciences,
Faculty of Life Sciences, UCL, London, UK.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Tumours with aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting (AIP) mutations often show
an unusually aggressive and invasive clinical course as up to 80% of AIP positive
pituitary adenomas have a certain degree of extrasellar extension. The exact
mechanisms by which AIP inactivation promotes an aggressive behaviour remain
unknown. The majority of adenohypophysis is composed of sinuous cords of
epithelial cells and consequently, molecules that can induce remodelling changes
in the epithelial tissue of the normal pituitary gland are of a particular interest.
Methods
The Drosophila melanogaster AIP orthologue gene CG1847 encodes for a protein
with a similar size and structure. To study CG1847, we generated loss of function
flies using two independent methods: RNA-interference and gene knockout via
P-element imprecise excision. We specifically addressed CG1847 function in the
developing Drosophila wing, a tissue consisting of only two epithelial layers. We
evaluated the resulting phenotypes in 2 stages of development: at pupal stage and
at adulthood.
Results
Silencing or deletion of CG1847 caused wing blisters in adults. Analysis of
developing wings at pupal stage revealed a marked deregulation of the actin
network in the wing epithelium, which resulted in loss of adhesion between the
two cell layers. Furthermore, actin dysregulation resulted in wing vein widening
as vein cells failed to form a lumen, enhancing the loss of adhesion phenotype.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the study of CG1847, the Drosophila orthologue of human AIP,
revealed an exciting novel role for this protein in cell adhesion. The mechanism of
CG1847 involvement in cell adhesion is via actin cytoskeleton deregulation,
supported also by the wing vein widening. This novel possible interaction with
cytoskeletal proteins suggests a putative involvement of AIP in cell motility and
tumour invasiveness as cytoskeletal disorganisation is an important feature of
epithelial-mesenchymal  transition,  a process  leading  to increased  migratory
capacity resulting in a more aggressive phenotype.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC5.1
OC5.2
Analysis of signal transduction in mice overexpressing mutant versus
intact IGFBP-2 identifies a plethora of IGFBP-2 dependent mechanisms
in different tissues and suggests permissive or regulatory effects of the
RGD-sequence
Andreas Hoeflich, Anja Reyer, Nancy Schindler, Daniela Ohde,
Elisa Wirthgen & Julia Brenmoehl
Institute for Genome Biology, Leibniz-Institute for Farm Animal Biology
(FBN), Dummerstorf, Germany.
IGFBP-2
represents  a  multifunctional  protein  with  effects  on  growth,
reproductive development, aging, and metabolism. For the expression of these
diverse effects in vivo, IGFBP-2 has a number of binding sites for IGFs, integrins,
and proteoglycans. In order to assess the relative contributions of these binding
sites to the multiple effects of IGFBP-2, we have developed transgenic mouse
models overexpressing intact or mutant IGFBP-2. Here we discuss functions of
the  RGD-sequence  present  in  the  IGFBP-2
molecule  and  that  has  been
demonstrated to mediate integrin binding in vitro and in vivo. Overexpression
of intact IGFBP-2 in transgenic mice (D-mice) significantly (P!0.05) slowed
down glucose clearance in the oral glucose tolerance test (GGT). By contrast,
overexpression of mutant IGFBP-2 lacking the RGD sequence in transgenic mice
(E-mice)  did  not  affect  glucose  tolerance  if  compared  to  non-transgenic
littermates (C-mice). We therefore may assume that the effects of IGFBP-2 on
glucose clearance after GTT are dependent on the RGD-sequence. While the
effects of the RGD-motif for glucose clearance were present both in male and
female mice, the RGD-sequence mediates higher life expectancy or long term
survival only in female but not in male mice. For somatic growth presence or
absence of the RGD-sequence has no effect in both genders. Now we performed a
comprehensive analysis of signal transduction (integrin signaling, MAPK and
PI3K  signaling  pathways)  in  different  tissues  of  our  experimental  system.
Interestingly, intact and mutated IGFBP-2 disrupted intracellular cell signaling in
a number of tissues. Depending on age, sex and tissue specific effects of the
presence or absence of the RGD domain have been observed. We may thus
assume that the RGD-sequence has both permissive and regulatory functions for
intracellular  signaling.  By  using  transgenic  mice  overexpressing  normal  or
mutated IGFBP-2 we provide evidence that the pleiotropic network can be
assessed on a mechanistic level.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC5.2
OC5.3
Development of a long-acting growth hormone antagonist for the
treatment of acromegaly
Ian Wilkinson, Sarbendra Pradhananga, Rowena Speak, Jon Sayers &
Richard Ross
Sheffield University, Sheffield, UK.
Background
The UK acromegaly register reported that !60% of acromegalics on medical
therapy had controlled disease (1). Pegvisomant, a growth hormone antagonist
(GHA), controls disease in O95% cases, but is not cost-effective and requires
high dose daily injections (2). We have developed a fusion technology for making
a cost-effective long-acting GH molecule (3), and generated a GHA by linking
mutated growth hormone to its binding protein (GHBP).
Design of GHA
A mutation (G120R) within site 2 of GH produces a receptor antagonist and
mutations in site 1 enhance binding creating a super antagonist. Linking to GHBP
delays clearance but site 1 in GH can bind to GHBP reducing activity. We
hypothesised that the W104A mutation in GHBP would prevent intramolecular
binding and generate a potent antagonist.
Methods
Four target molecules were gene synthesised to include either site 2 mutation
(GHA1), site 1 & 2 mutations (GHA2), site 2CW104A mutations (GHA3) and
site 1 & 2CW104A mutations (GHA4). In vitro bio-potency of CHO purified
protein was measured using GH-specific bioactivity assays.
Pharmacokinetics
Rats were given 1 nMole/kg (i.v) of GHA1-4. GHA from serum was quantified
using an in-house GH ELISA.
Pharmacodynamics
Rabbits were given 2 mg/kg (s.c). GHA from serum was quantified using an
in-house GH ELISA. IGF-I levels were analysed using an automated assay.
Results
Median IC50s of 45 nM (GHA1); 133 nM (GHA2); 40 nM (GHA3) and 16 nM
(GHA4)  were  obtained.  GHA4
antagonist  activity  was  comparable  to
Pegvisomant.  GHA1,  2,  &  4  had  similar  terminal  half-life’s  O20 h.  Only
GHA4 induced a reduction in IGF-I in rabbits of 14% with an associated
reduction in weight gain.
Conclusions
GHA4 has the potential to be a long-acting potent GHA with no requirement for
post-translational modification and is likely to be a cost-effective treatment for
acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC5.3
OC5.4
CNS IL-6 Trans-Signaling is enhanced in obese mice to improve
anorexigenic and glucoregulatory effects of IL-6
Katharina Timper1,2, Jesse Denson1,2, Sophie Marie Steculorum1,2,
Stefan Rose-John3, Frank Thomas Wunderlich1,2 & Jens C Bruning1,2
1Department of Neuronal Control of Metabolism, Max Planck Institute for
Metabolism Research, Center for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Preventive
Medicine (CEDP), Cologne, Germany;2Excellence Cluster on Cellular
Stress Responses in Aging Associated Diseases (CECAD) and Center of
Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany;3Department of Biochemistry, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
Introduction
Interleukin (IL)-6 can activate signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)3-dependent signaling similar to leptin in neurons. Here we demonstrate
that  central  application  of  IL-6
suppresses  feeding  and  improves  glucose
tolerance  in  mice. Furthermore,  we  found  that  central  IL-6
trans-signaling
is enhanced in obese mice to improve anorexigenic and glucoregulatory effects
of IL-6.
Methods/design
Glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity as well as food intake and pSTAT3
expression were investigated upon central application of IL-6 or hyper-IL-6, a
fusion protein of IL-6 and its soluble receptor, in high-fat diet-fed and chow-fed
control mice as well as in mice lacking the IL-6R in the whole body or in distinct
areas  of  the hypothalamus
(Nkx2.1-Cre;IL-6Ra-flox mice)  or  the forebrain
(CamKIIa-Cre;IL-6R-flox mice). IL-6 trans-signaling in the central nervous
system (CNS) was inhibited by intracerebroventricular administration of soluble
gp130 (sgp130Fc), an inhibitor of soluble IL-6Ra (sIL-6R) complexed with IL-6.
Furthermore,  the  concentration  of  endogenous  sIL-6R  was  assessed  in
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma of obese and lean mice.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
In contrast to leptin, the action of which is attenuated upon obesity development,
the ability of IL-6 to suppress feeding is enhanced in obese compared to lean
mice. Surprisingly, IL-6 suppresses feeding in the absence of classical IL-6-
receptor (IL-6R)-dependent signaling in neurons of mice lacking the IL-6R either
specifically in hypothalamic or in all forebrain neurons. Accordingly, obese mice
exhibit increased concentrations of the soluble IL-6 receptor in the CSF, and
blocking IL-6-trans-signaling via central injection of sgp130Fc abrogates the
ability of IL-6 to suppress feeding. Similarly, central injection of hyper-IL-6
suppresses feeding in mice completely lacking expression of the membrane
bound IL-6R.
Conclusion
Collectively, these experiments indicate that in obesity IL-6-trans-signaling is
enhanced in the CNS of obese mice, allowing IL-6 to exert its beneficial
metabolic effects even under conditions of leptin resistance.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC5.4
OC5.5
Zebrafish tool for the study of prokineticin receptor 2 (PROKR2)
pathway on GNRH3 neuronal development
Ivan Bassi1,3, Federica Marelli3, Valeria Vezzoli2,3, Luca Persani2,3,
Yoav Gothilf4 & Marco Bonomi2,3
1Department of Health Science, University of Milano, Milano, Italy;
2Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of
Milano, Milano, Italy;3IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Division of
Endocrine & Metabolic Diseases, San Luca Hospital and Lab fo
Experimental Endocrinology, Milano, Italy;4Department of Neurobiology,
Tel-Aviv University, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences and
Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
The G protein-coupled receptor PROKR2 play an  important  and not  fully
understood role in GnRH-secreting neurons physiology. Indeed, mutations of
PROKR2  in  humans  are  known  to  cause  Congenital  Hypogonadotropic
Hypogonadism (CHH) although with an important reproductive and olfactory
phenotypic heterogeneity. The attempt to mimic PROKR2 human allelic variants
in mouse model has so far failed to give insights into the mechanisms involved.
The zebrafish (ZF), due to its amenability to genetic manipulation and imaging,
has proved to be an ideal model organism for studying the early migration of
GnRH neurons and the formation of the GnRH network. Nevertheless, only few
data are available in the literature concerning the prokineticin-receptors in ZF.
We performed bioinformatics analysis using public databases (Pubmed, ZFIN and
ENSEMBLE) and bioinformatics tools (UCSC BLAT alignment, Genomicus)
unmasking the presence of two well-conserved loci in the ZF genome, on chr1
and chr13, named prokr1a and prokr1b respectively. In order to correlate their
expression with GnRH3 neuronal development we performed whole mount in situ
hybridization (WISH) and qRT-PCR experiments. WISH experiments revealed
peculiar pattern of expression for prok-receptors. Indeed, prokr1a is mainly
expressed  in  midbrain-hindbrain  boundary  at
36
and
48 hpf  and  later  in
development in liver; while prokr1b presented a strong signal in olfactory
placode and hypothalamic GnRH neurons starting from 36 hpf. The qRT-PCR
results underline how prokr1b displayed higher expression level compared to
prokr1a but, most interesting, the expression level start to increase at 24 hpf until
72 hpf, consistently with the migration pattern of GnRH3 fibers. In conclusion,
our results suggest that prokr1b is the potential candidate involved in the GnRH-
secreting  neurons  migration  process  from  olfactory  placode  to  their  final
hypothalamic destination. These data open the possibility to characterize the
role of ZF prokineticin-receptors in physiological and pathological conditions
thus giving novel insights into the pathogenesis of human CHH due to mutations
in the PROKR2 gene.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC5.5
Diabetes therapy & complications
OC6.1
Choroidal thickness in diabetes mellitus type 1 without clinical diabetic
retinopathy
Eylem Cagiltay1, Fahrettin Akay1, Sami Toyran1 & Fatih C Gundogan2
1Izmir Military Hospital, Konak/Izmir, Turkey;2Gulhane Military Medical
Academy, Etlik/Ankara, Turkey.
Purpose
To determine the changes of the choroidal thickness (CT) in diabetes mellitus
(DM) type 1 patients without clinical diabetic retinopathy (DR).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
We evaulated 50 patients with DM type 1 (50 eyes) and 50 healthy controls (50
eyes) in İzmir Military Hospital from January 2012, through January 2013. DR
status was evaluated by indirect fundoscopy and included the study if they have
no clinical diabetic retinopathy. Age, gender, duration since diagnosis of diabetes,
fasting glycose level and serum glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) were gathered
from the patient charts. Right eyes of the each study and control groups were
examined  with  spectral  domain  optical  cohorens  tomography
(SD-OCT).
Average macular thickness, central foveal thickness were calculated in macula
map. Choroidal thickness was measured at 7 points for each patient: subfoveal, at
500, 1000, 1500 mm nasal and temporal by using the Nidek SD-OCT software.
Age, sex, spherical equivalent (SE), intraocular pressure (IOP) and axial length
(AL) were compared among groups by means of analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Groups compared with Student t test.
Results
The mean HbA1c was 8.9G0.9% in the diabetic group. Mean duration of the
diabetes was 6.1G2.8 years in study group. There were no statistical differences
in age, gender, SE, AL, and IOP between groups (PO0.05). Subfoveal CT was
266.3G36.5 mm in study group and 278.9G32.8 mm in control group. It was
significantly decreased in diabetic group versus control (P!0.05). Nasal 500,
1000, 1500 mm CT were decreased in study group (P!0.05). Temporal 500,
1000, 1500 mm CT were decreased in diabetic group. There was no differences
according to the central macular thickness between groups.
Conclusions
Results of our study suggest that the general decrease of CT in patients with no
retinopathy caused by early choroidal vasculopathy of DM. This results may
guide the development of protective therapeutic strategies for avoiding the
complications of DM in the future.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC6.1
OC6.2
Cortical bone size deficit in adult patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus
Charlotte Verroken1,2, Wout Pieters1, Loïc Beddeleem1, Stefan Goemaere2,
Hans Zmierczak2, Jean-Marc Kaufman1,2 & Bruno Lapauw1,2
1Department of Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium;
2Unit for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
Background
Impaired bone geometry and/or aberrant bone matrix formation may underlie the
increased fracture risk observed in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).
Although reduced areal and volumetric bone mineral density (aBMD, vBMD)
have been observed in pediatric and adolescent T1DM patients, few studies have
confirmed these observations in adults. Moreover, data on bone geometry in
T1DM remain scarce.
Objective
To compare areal and volumetric bone parameters and cortical bone geometry in
adult T1DM patients and gender- and age-matched controls.
Methods
In 64 adult T1DM patients (39 men, 41.1G8.1 years) and 63 controls, areal and
volumetric bone parameters and bone geometry were assessed using DXA and
pQCT (radius: 4% and 66% regions).
Results
Median  diabetes  duration  was
23.1
years,  with  a  mean  HbA1c  of
63G5
mmol/mol over the last 10 years. In age-, height-, weight- and gender-adjusted
analyses, T1DM was associated with lower aBMD and bone mineral content at
the total hip (K5.14%, PZ0.011 and K6.72%, PZ0.013) and femoral neck
(K7.43%, PZ0.003 and K9.04%, P!0.001) and with lower femoral neck bone
area (K2.82%, PZ0.014). Cortical vBMD was higher in T1DM patients as
compared to controls (C2.06%, PZ0.004), but total vBMD was lower (K5.19%,
PZ0.020) and T1DM patients showed a cortical bone size deficit with smaller
cortical thickness (K6.21%, PZ0.035) and trends towards lower cortical area
(K4.64%,  PZ0.060)  and  increased  endosteal  circumference
(C5.29%,
PZ0.074). Furthermore, T1DM was associated with lower trabecular vBMD
and  higher  trabecular  area
(K9.00%  and  C7.62%,  PZ0.013).  Except  for
trabecular area, which was higher in male but not female T1DM patients as
compared to controls, no major interactions between health status and gender
were observed.
Conclusion
Besides decreased aBMD and trabecular vBMD, adult T1DM patients present
with a cortical bone size deficit characterized by lower cortical thickness and
higher endosteal circumference. This might contribute to the higher fracture risk
observed in diabetic patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC6.2
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
OC6.3
TRAIL treatment reduces high-fat diet-induced hyperglycemia and
hyperinsulinemia
Stella Bernardi1, Fleur Bossi1, Veronica Tisato2, Stefania Biffi4,
Andrea Lorenzon3, Barbara Toffoli1, Giorgio Zauli4,2, Paola Secchiero2 &
Bruno Fabris1
1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy;2University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy;
3Cluster in Biomedicine (CBM), Trieste, Italy;4IRCCS Burlo Garofolo,
Trieste, Italy.
Introduction
Recent studies suggest that a circulating protein called TRAIL (TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand) may have an important role in the treatment of type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM). It has been shown that TRAIL deficiency worsens
T2DM and that TRAIL delivery, when it is given before disease onset, slows
down T2DM development. This study aimed at evaluating whether TRAIL had
the potential not only to prevent, but also to treat T2DM.
Methods/design
30 male C57bl6J mice aged 8 weeks were randomly assigned to a standard diet
(CNT, nZ10), or a high-fat diet (HFD, nZ20), providing 60% of calories from
fat. After 4 weeks, HFD-fed mice were further randomized to receive either
placebo (HFD, nZ10) or TRAIL (HFD C TRAIL, nZ10), which was delivered
weekly by intraperitoneal injection. Body weight, food intake, fasting glucose and
insulin were measured at baseline and every 4 weeks. GTT (glucose tolerance
test) and ITT (insulin tolerance test) were performed at 6 and 12 weeks. After 12
weeks of study, the distribution of Cy5.5-labelled TRAIL was evaluated by
whole-body scan. Then, mice were sacrificed and bloods and tissues (pancreas,
quadricep, liver, adipose tissue) collected for further analyses.
Results
Cy5.5-labelled TRAIL gave the highest signal a few hours after being injected.
Not with standing its rapid clearance, at the end of the study, TRAIL reduced
body weight gain, without affecting food intake. Moreover, TRAIL reduced the
hyperglycemia and the hyperinsulinemia displayed by the HFD-fed mice both at
fasting and during the 12-week GTT, and it also significantly lowered glucose
levels during the 12-week ITT, indicating an improvement in the peripheral
response to insulin.
Conclusion
This study confirms the ability of TRAIL to significantly attenuate the metabolic
abnormalities induced by a HFD, and shows that TRAIL is effective also when it
is given after disease onset.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC6.3
OC6.4
LEA29Y expression in transgenic porcine islets prevents islet graft
rejection in humanized mice without systemic immunosuppressive
therapy
Lelia Wolf-van Buerck1, Marion Schuster1, Andrea Baehr2, Nik Klymiuk2,
Eckhard Wolf2,3 & Jochen Seissler1
1Medizinische Klinik IV, Diabetes Zentrum, Klinikum der Ludwig-
Maximilians-Universitat, Munich, Germany;2Chair for Molecular Animal
Breeding and Biotechnology and Laboratory for Functional Genome
Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat,
Munich, Germany;3German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Munich,
Germany.
Transplantation of pancreas or isolated Langerhans islets can cure type 1 diabetes.
Xenografts from transgenic pigs represent a promising source to overcome the
shortage of organ donors. We investigated the immunosuppressive effect of local
LEA29Y expression (a high-affinity variant of CTLA4-Ig) by transplantation of
neonatal porcine islet-like clusters (NPICCs) from INSLEA29Y transgenic pigs
into humanized mice. NPICCs from 1-5 day-old pigs expressing LEA29Y under
the control of the porcine insulin promoter (LEA-tg) or from wild-type pigs (wt)
were  transplanted  under  the  kidney  capsule
(Tx)  of  streptozotocin-diabetic
NOD-scid IL2Rgammanull (NSG) mice (Tx-LEA-tg; Tx-wt). Xenorejection was
investigated after transfer of human PBMCs (PBMC-NSG mice). Long-lasting
effects of local LEA29Y expression were assessed by Tx in mice carrying a stable
human immune system (transfer of hCD34C cells) (HSC-NSG mice). In PBMC-
NSG mice, 80% of mice transplanted with wt-NPICCs (nZ5) developed overt
diabetes within 30 days after transfer of a human immune system indicating
xenograft rejection. LEA-tg NPICCs were completely protected from rejection
(nZ5). In HSC-NSG mice, normalization of blood glucose levels (66.6%) and
post-transplant glucose tolerance was comparable in Tx-LEA-tg (nZ12) and
immunodeficient control mice (nZ13). All Tx-wt HSC-NSG mice remained
hyperglycemic (nZ11). In both animal models, graft-bearing kidneys revealed
destruction of wt-NPICCs with massive leukocyte (hCD45C) and lymphocyte
infiltration (CD4C, CD8C), which was absent in PBMC- and HSC-NSG mice
transplanted with LEA-tg NPICCs. This is the first study providing evidence that
beta-cell specific LEA29Y expression has a long-lasting protective effect on
inhibition of human anti-pig xenoimmunity. This finding may have important
implications  for  the  development  of  a  low-toxic  protocol  for  porcine  islet
transplantation in patients with type 1 diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC6.4
OC6.5
Dapagliflozin added to lixisenatide in type 2 diabetic patients
Tomislav Bozek, Lea Smircic Duvnjak & Kristijan Peros
University Clinic Vuk Vrhovac, Clinical Hospital Merkur, Zagreb, Croatia.
Introduction
Type 2 diabetes represents an important health problem and is designated by a
progressive course. Since the vast majority of type
2 diabetic patients are
overweight, there is a need not only to avoid weight gain but to lower body
weight. Therefore, the usage of drugs that have the potential to lower body weight
(GLP1 RA and SGLT2 -inhibitors) should with metformin be preferred initial
therapy in the obese and overweight type 2 diabetic patients.
The  aim  of  the  study  was  to  determine  the  efficacy  of  combination  of
dapagliflozin and lixisenatide in terms of glucose control and body weight
change in type 2 diabetic patients.
Patients and Methods
62 uncontrolled diabetic patients on metformin C DPP-IV inhibitor G SU
(32 male, 30 female, mean age 62.5G5.6 years, HbA1c 8.3G0.8%, BMI 38.7
G3.2 kg/m2 diabetes duration 7.2G3.2 years) were randomised to metforminC
lixisenatide (31 patients) or metformin C lixisenatide C dapagliflozin (31 patients)
and followed for 6 months.
Results
A difference was observed in mean weight change K8.5G4.2 kg in the group
treated with metformin C lixisenatide C dapagliflozin, and K5.1G4.7 kg in
the metformin  C lixisenatide group (PZ0.09). No difference between the
lixisenatide and lixisenatide C dapagliflozin group was observed concerning the
percentage of subjects reaching HbA1c ! 7% (47% vs 50%). No difference was
found in reduction of HbA1c (1.27% vs 1.21%).
Conclusion
Combination of lixisenatide and dapagliflozin represents highly potent treatment
option in obese and overweight patients.
Combination of lixisenatide and dapagliflozin resulted in significant reduction of
weight in comparison to lixisenatide alone with metformin. Interestingly, no
difference in HbA1c level between the two groups was found. These results
suggest that effect on weight loss is additive, but without effect on glucose
control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC6.5
Cardiovascular endocrinology
OC7.1
Lipoprotein lipase DNA methylation: cause or consequence of
metabolic disorders
Daniel Castellano-Castillo1, Isabel Moreno-Indias1, Maria Isabel
Queipo-Ortun˜o1, Jose Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1,2, Juan Alcaide-Torres1,
Francisco Tinahones1,2 & Fernando Cardona-Diaz1
1Biomedical Research Laboratory, Endocrinology Department, IBIMA,
Malaga, Spain;2Endocrinology Department, Virgen de la Victoria
University Hospital, Malaga, Spain.
Introduction
DNA methylation is one of the epigenetic mechanisms existing to regulate gene
expression. It is believed that methylation of DNA is susceptible of change by
environmental and nutritional factors. Thus, epigenetics provides a mechanism
which may explain the etiology of some metabolic disorders and obesity.
Aim
The aim of this study is to analyze the DNA methylation level of several
lipoprotein lipase (LPL)-promoter-CpG island in human visceral adipose tissue
(VAT), as well as the gene and protein expression of this gene.
Material and methods
A total of 90 VAT samples were obtained during bariatric or hiatal hernia
surgeries.  Biochemical  parameters  from  these  patients  were  measured,  and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
samples were assigned to two groups attending their BMI (BMI!30, BMIO30).
We also assigned the samples according to glucose status in pre-diabetic/diabetic
subjects (NG!100 mg/dl, P/DO100 mg/dl). Methylation level was measured
through pyrosequentation, using the Pyromark technology and predesigned CpG
methylation  assays
(Qiagen).  The  results  were  analyzed  using  the  CpG
methylation software (Qiagen) and the statistical package SPSS.
Results
We found higher levels of DNA methylation in P/D respect to NG subjects, while
the gene expression was inverse. There was also a significant difference between
subjects with BMI!30 and subjects with BMIO30, being lower the DNA
methylation and higher the gene expression respectively. There was the same
tendency in protein expression, with lower levels in PD subjects and lower levels
in  subjects  with  BMIO30.  Furthermore,  LPL  methylation  and  LPL  gene
expression correlated negatively. LPL methylation correlated positively with
insulin, glucose, triglycerides, and HOMA-IR. There was a negative correlation
between LPL gene expression with BMI and glucose.
Conclusion
LPL gene expression is related to the methylation level in its promoter. LPL
methylation and LPL gene expression is associated to metabolic profile and BMI.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC7.1
OC7.2
Cardiovascular and metabolic morbidity in adult patients with classic
congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Luisa Paizoni, Kerstin Schaefer, Evelina Thomas & Nicole Reisch
Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinik der Universitat Munchen,
Munich, Germany.
Background
Several studies suggest health problems in adult patients with CAH. However,
data is inconsistent and based on small and relatively young cohorts.
The aim of this study was to analyze the metabolic and cardiovascular health in a
cohort of 90 adult patients with classic CAH.
Subjects and methods
Participants included 90 patients with classic CAH: age range 18-62 years (mean
32.9G10.5, median 29.2) 39 male, 51 female, 61 salt wasting, 29 simple virilising
and
90
healthy  controls  matched  for  age,  sex,  BMI  and  smoking-habit.
Anthropometric, metabolic, and subjective health status was evaluated (including
measurement of intima media thickness of the common carotid artery, analysis of
the body composition by bioimpedance analysis (BIA) and 24 hour ambulatory
blood pressure).
Results
There was no significant difference in intima-media-thickness of the common
carotid artery between patients and healthy subjects (median 0.60G0.08 mm
versus 0.64G0.09 mm, PZ0.067 for the right side and median 0.060G0.10 mm
versus median 0.61G0.09 mm, PZ0.653 for the left side). Patients showed
increased BMI (mean 27.0 kg/m2  versus 25.9 kg/m2) compared to the general
German population. Patients were significantly shorter (median 1.64G0.09 m
versus 1.73G0.09 m, P%0.001), both male and female had increased body fat
mass in proportion to lean body mass (median 0.41G0.22 versus 0.29G0.10,
P%0.001  for  male  and  median
0.61G0.24
versus
0.49G0.19,  PZ0.008)
compared to the control group. 24-hour blood-pressure measurements showed
an impaired nocturnal drop, 54% of patients showed increased nocturnal systolic
blood pressures, 17% had elevated systolic and diastolic blood pressures during
the night time and were classified as non-dippers (systolic nocturnal drop: median
9.8G5.3%, diastolic nocturnal drop: median 15.7G6.6%)
Conclusion
Patients  with  classic  CAH  are  at  substantially  higher  metabolic  and
cardiovascular risk compared to a healthy control group. Better prevention
strategies need to be employed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC7.2
OC7.3
Muscle strength in Cushing’s syndrome: cross-sectional evaluation of
the German Cushing’s registry
Christina M Berr1, Marcus Quinkler2, Mareike Stieg3, Timo Deutschbein4,
Andrea Osswald1, Ralf Schmidmaier1, Nicole Reisch1, Katrin Ritzel1,
Rainer Blaser5, Martin Fassnacht4, Gunter Stalla3, Felix Beuschlein1 &
Martin Reincke1
1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Munchen, Germany;
2Endokrinologie in Charlottenburg, Berlin, Germany;3Max Planck Institute
of Psychiatry, Munchen, Germany;4Department of Medicine I University of
Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany;5Institut fur Medizinische Statistik und
Epidemiologie, Munchen, Germany.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Background
Endogenous Cushing’s syndrome (CS) is rare with an estimated yearly incidence
of 1-3 patients/million. CS describes a group of diseases that have in common an
excess secretion of glucocorticoids which results in a characteristic clinical
phenotype. Severe courses of Cushing’s syndrome are characterized by a break-
down of protein catabolism translating into clinical consequences including
muscle weakness. While remission of CS is achievable by surgical removal of the
ACTH- or cortisol-producing tumour, the effect of biochemical cure on muscular
function is yet unclear.
Objective
The aim was to analyze parameters of muscular function in Cushing’s syndrome.
Methods
We performed a cross-sectional, prospective study
(as part of the German
Cushing’s  registry)  analysing
289  consecutive  patients  in
4 centres  of  the
Cushing’s registry. Patients with CS were studied during the active phase of the
disease (ACS) or being in remission after successful treatment (CSiR, remission
time 2 to 53 years). Rule-out CS patients were used as controls (RO). The
following parameters were analysed: hand grip strength using a hand grip
dynamometer and the chair rising test as measure of proximal muscular function.
Hand grip was standardized to age and gender.
Results
We included 47 patients with ACS (64% female), 149 CSiR (82% female) and 93
RO (72% female). The age and gender corrected normally distributed hand grip
strength was significantly lower in ACS compared to the RO group (dominant
hand PZ0.002, non-dominant hand PZ0.003). Similarly, lower limb muscular
function was impaired in ACS (PZ0.001). The CSiR group showed age and
gender corrected reduced hand grip strength
(94%  for non-dominant hand,
PZ0.007; 92% for dominant hand P!0.001 compared to normal reference
values). 20% of CSiR performed a chair rising test of R12 seconds, a threshold
associated with adverse outcome in geriatric patients, independent of time elapsed
since successful treatment (PZ0.89).
Conclusion
Cushing’s syndrome affects muscle strength in the acute phase, but functional
impairment remains also severely impaired in one fifths of patients in the long-term.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC7.3
OC7.4
Cortisol autonomy is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular
events and mortality in patients with adrenal incidentalomas: beneficial
effects of a selective use of adrenalectomy
Giuseppe Reimondo1, Elena Mbachu1, Micaela Pellegrino2, Anna Pia1,
Emanuele Pepe3, Giorgio Borretta2 & Massimo Terzolo1
1Internal Medicine 1, Department of C linical and Biological Sciences -
A.O.U. San Luigi Gonzaga, Orbassano, Italy;2Endocrinology, AO Santa
Croce e Carle, Cuneo, Italy;3Department of Physics, Torino, Italy.
Introduction
Cortisol autonomy may be frequently demonstrated in patients with adrenal
incidentaloma and this has been associated to increased cardiovascular (CV) risk.
However, only few data are available on CV events and related mortality in such
patients. Aims of the study were: 1) to stratify CV events and mortality by the
degree of cortisol secretion; 2) to evaluate the effect of adrenalectomy on CV
events and mortality.
Methods and Design
Data of 218 patients (89 M, 129 F, median age 62 years) followed for a median
period of 60 (24-348) months were retrieved. All patients underwent a standard
baseline hormonal evaluation. Patients with malignancy, aldosterone producing
adenoma  and  pheochromocytoma  were  excluded;
30
patients  underwent
adrenalectomy.
Results
Patients who died during follow-up had higher post-DST cortisol at baseline than
patients who survived (PZ0.04). Death was mostly due to CV causes (41%).
Among patients who were not operated on, more CV events (PZ0.04) and more
deaths (PZ0.07) were observed in the group with post-DST cortisol R1.8
mcg/dl. Mortality was significantly increased in patients with post-DST cortisol
R5 mcg/dl (PZ0.008). Patients who were operated on had at baseline higher
post-DST cortisol (P!0.001), lower ACTH (PZ0.02) larger mass size (P!0.01)
and younger age (PZ0.02) than the remainders. At the last follow-up visit, the
patients who were operated on had a lower frequency of hypertension (PZ0.01).
Non-operated patients had a higher frequency of new CV events during follow-up
(23.5% vs 6.7%, PZ0.04). One death was observed during follow-up in the
surgical group (3.3%) versus 16 deaths among non-operated patients (8.5%).
Conclusions
In patients with adrenal incidentaloma cortisol autonomy is associated with
increased risk of CV events and mortality. A selective use of adrenalectomy in
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
younger patients with higher degree of cortisol autonomy may have a positive
effect on CV outcomes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC7.4
OC7.5
Hypothyroidism and levothyroxine treatment is associated with
increased mortality in heart failure patients
Mette Nygaard Andersen1, Anne-Marie Schjerning Olsen1, Usman Khalid1,
Søren Lund Kristensen1, Jens Faber2,3, Christian Torp-Pedersen4,
Gunnar Gislason1,5 & Christian Selmer6
1Department of Cardiology, Gentofte University Hospital, Hellerup,
Denmark;2Department of Endocrinology, Herlev University Hospital,
Herlev, Denmark;3Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark;4Department of Health Science and Technology,
University of Aalborg, Aalborg, Denmark;5The Danish Heart Foundation,
Copenhagen, Denmark;6Department of Endocrinology, Amager and
Hvidovre University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction
Hypothyroidism  has  detrimental  effects  on  the  cardiovascular  system  but
controversy  remains  over the benefit of levothyroxine substitution in heart
failure (hf). The aim of this register based cohort study was to examine the effects
of levothyroxine treatment on all-cause mortality in patients with hf.
Methods
The study cohort comprised all Danish citizens aged R18 years admitted with hf
in 1997-2012 and still alive 30 days after discharge. Patients with a previous
history of thyroid dysfunction, levothyroxine treatment, amiodarone treatment or
related thyroid medication were excluded. Subsequent levothyroxine treatment
was identified by individual-level linkage of nationwide registers of hospital-
ization and drug dispensing from pharmacies. Treated patients contributed with
risk time in the untreated group and moved to the treated group when they
initiated  levothyroxine  treatment.  Patients  left  study  at  death,  emigration,
initiation of amiodarone treatment or end-of-study. Risk of death was analysed
by calculating incidence rates per 1000 person years (PY) and incidence rate ratio
(IRR) was analysed by Poisson regression models adjusted for age, gender and
comorbidity.
Results
A total of 242,250 patients were admitted with hf in the study period (mean age
70.9
[S.D.G14.5] years,
53.5%  male). 6,619 (2.7%) of these patients were
prescribed levothyroxine after discharge. During a mean follow-up time of 7.4
years (S.D.G7.6), 167.874 (69.3%) patients died. Mortality rates were 93.4 and
139.6 deaths per 1000 PY among untreated and levothyroxine-treated patients,
respectively. A 23% increased risk of all-cause mortality was found in patients
substituted with levothyroxine (IRR: 1.23 [95% CI: 1.19-1.27]).
Conclusion
We found an increased risk of all-cause mortality in hf patients treated with
levothyroxine compared with those without levothyroxine treatment. The impact
of thyroid dysfunction on prognosis in hf and benefit or harm of thyroid hormone
substitution warrants further investigation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC7.5
Thyroid - Translational
OC8.1
Non-genomic effects of thyroid hormones on endothelial cell tube
formation
Kathrin A Schmohl1, Maike Dohmann2, Alexandra Wechselberger2,
Peter J Nelson2 & Christine Spitzweg1
1Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of Munich,
Munich, Germany;2Medical Policlinic IV, University Hospital of Munich,
Munich, Germany.
Wound healing and tumour stroma formation are associated with angiogenesis
and require interactions of various different cell types. We and others have shown
that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) differentiate into fibroblast-/pericyte-like
cells and secrete proangiogenic factors. Thyroid hormones act as proangiogenic
modulators mediated by non-genomic mechanisms via cell surface receptor
integrin avb3. The aim of this study is to evaluate the stimulatory activity of T3
and T4 on endothelial cell tube formation in concert with the assessment of
angiogenic effects of MSCs.
Primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were seeded on
Matrigel and tube formation was analysed microscopically. Treatment with T3
stimulated tube formation as evidenced by a larger number of junctions and
meshes and an increased total tube length compared to untreated cells. Additional
treatment with tetrac, a specific inhibitor of integrin avb3-mediated action of
T3/T4, reduced tube formation to basal level. Similar, albeit weaker, effects were
observed for T4. Further, primary human bone marrow-derived MSC-conditioned
medium stimulated tube formation. After additional treatment with T3, an even
more pronounced angiogenic effect was observed compared to untreated control
cells and tetrac-treated cells. In a further set of experiments, co-cultures of
HUVECs and MSCs were analysed in this assay. MSCs were found to be
integrated into developing tubular networks adjacent to HUVECs - a system that
we are now employing to elucidate effects of thyroid hormones on HUVEC-MSC
interactions.
Our data suggest that thyroid hormones T3 and T4 stimulate angiogenesis in
HUVECs in an integrin avb3-dependent manner, an effect that can be enhanced
by additional treatment with MSC-conditioned medium. These studies improve
our understanding of the critical role of thyroid hormone in the regulation of
angiogenesis both in the context of wound healing and tumour stroma formation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC8.1
OC8.2
Selenium modulates apoptosis in thyroid follicular cells:
characterization of molecular mechanisms
Immacolata Cristina Nettore1, Luigi Maione1, Carmela Passaro2,
Claudia Pivonello1, Mariarosaria Negri1, Silvio Desiderio1, Emma De
Nisco1, Rosario Pivonello1, Paola Ungaro3, Giuseppe Portella2,
Annamaria Colao1 & Paolo Emidio Macchia1
1Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Università degli studi di
Napoli “Federico II”, Naples, Italy;2Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche
Traslazionali, Università degli Studi di Napoli “Federico II”, Naples, Italy;
3Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR
(IEOS-CNR) “G. Salvatore”, Naples, Italy.
Inflammation and several oxidative processes are modulated by Selenium (Se)
trough  the  selenoproteins.  Se  deficiency  has  been  associated  with  thyroid
autoimmune diseases and hypothyroidism, while Se-supplementation reduces
antibodies titles and ameliorates ultrasound pattern of the gland.
Aim of the current study, is to study the molecular effects of Se-supplementation
in thyroid follicular cells (FRTL5).
FRTL5 cells have been starved and treated with or without 100 nM Sodium-
Selenite
(Na-Se).  In  comparison  to  the  untreated  cells,  the  number  of
Se-supplemented cells is higher and mortality is reduced as demonstrated by
Fluorescence-activated Cells Sorting (FACS) analysis. The maximum effect is
present 48 h after the beginning of the treatment. Moreover, after 72 h of Na-Se
treatment, cell proliferation improves, as demonstrated by DNA content measured
by bisbenzimide fluorescent dye (Hoechst 33258).
Real-time qPCR performed from 12 to 96 h after Se-treatment demonstrate a
reduced expression of pro-apoptotic genes (Casp8ap2, Bcl2l11) starting from 24 h
and over-expression of anti-apoptotic genes (Bcl2, Bcl2l1, Dapk1 and NFKB1)
starting from 48 h.
Next, the anti-apoptotic role of Se has been tested in FRTL5 cells pre-treated with
tunicamycin, an inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation that induces apoptosis via
ER-stress. In  detail,  FRTL5
were  incubated  for
24 hours with  2 mg/ml of
tunicamycin (TN) with or without a 72-96 h 500 nM of Na-Se pre-treatment. Cell
viability
(measured by MTT) is higher (P!0.05) in Na-Se pre-treated cells
compared to cells incubated with tunicamycin alone, and Western Blot confirmed
a reduced Poly- (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage at 96 hrs of combined
treatment.
This is the first report directly demonstrating a specific effect of Se on apoptosis
modulation in normal thyroid follicular cells. Our data provide a molecular
explanation for clinical improvement observed after treatment with Se in patients
with autoimmune thyroid disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC8.2
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
OC8.3
Identification of novel genetic loci associated with thyroid function
Dubravka Brdar1, Antonela Boljat2, Vesela Torlak1, Ante Punda1,
Vesna Boraska2, Ivana Gunjaca2, Nikolina Vidan2, Bernarda Lozic3,
Ozren Polasek4, Caroline Hayward5, Maja Barbalic2 & Tatijana Zemunik2
1Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Split, Split, Croatia;
2Department of Medical Biology, University of Split, School of Medicine,
Split, Croatia;3Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Split, Split,
Croatia;4Department of Epidemiology, University of Split, School of
Medicine Split, Split, Croatia;5MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of
Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.
Objective
Thyroid  hormones  have  essential  role  in  regulation  of  cellular  growth,
development and metabolism. Although genetic variants seem to be an important
determinant of thyroid hormone levels the data about involved genes are still
limited. Therefore, in order to determine genetic variants underlying thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH), free thyroxine (fT4) and free triiodothyronine (fT3)
plasma level we performed a genome wide association study (GWAS) in Croatian
subjects.
Methods
Immunoassay method was used to determine circulating plasma level of TSH, fT4
and fT3 in 1012 participants from Split, Croatia. Participants with a history of
thyroid disease treatment (41 of them) were excluded from the study. The GWAS
for TSH, fT4 and fT3 was performed using 1000 genomes imputed data and was
accounted for genetic relatedness among individuals. Association was tested by
linear regression adjusted for sex and age assuming an additive genetic model.
Results
We identified one new locus associated with fT3 level  with genome-wide
significance: rs118173732 located upstream of DIAPH3 gene on the 13q21.2
(PZ4.9059359!10K8; bZK1.2195316; SEZK0.2235750).
Conclusion
The study found new locus associated with fT3 level in general population. The
results should be checked in a replication study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC8.3
OC8.4
Discovering the difference in the tear fluid proteome between Graves’
patients with or without orbitopathy
Cecilie Aas1,3, Ingrid Nordheim2,4, Erik Fink Eriksen3,4, Ellen Charlotte
1,2
Børnick2,5, Per Medbøe Thorsby1,2 & Milaim Pepaj
1Hormone Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;2Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway;3Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway;4Department of Endocrinology, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway;5Department of Ophthalmology, Oslo, Norway.
Background
Graves’ orbitopathy (GO) is a severe organ-specific autoimmune inflammatory
ocular complication most often associated with Graves’ disease (GD). Besides the
cosmetic  problems  these  patients  develop, GO may  also  cause  severe  eye
complications threatening the vision of the patient. Additionally, GO complicates
the treatment of patients with GD, making the identification of Graves patients at
risk for eye disease before they develop symptoms a critical step for the clinical
handling and quality of life of these patients. The high concentration of proteins in
tear fluid makes it an important source for studying potential protein biomarkers
for GO. The aim of the present study was to quantitatively compare tear fluid from
GD patients with active GO and patients with GD without GO (controls) using
untargeted quantitative proteomics based on dimethyl labeling in combination
with 2D-LC-MS/MS.
Results
Among the 1212 proteins identified, 16 proteins showed significant alterations in
abundance between the two groups. Thus, in the present study we reveal a number
of  novel  dysregulated  proteins  in  GO  which  may  contribute  to  a  better
understanding of the disease. In particular, up-regulation of lacrimal gland
proteins, suggest involvement of the lacrimal gland in the pathogenesis of GO. It
remains to be elucidated whether some of these proteins can be used as markers
for patients at risk for developing GO as well as useful indicators for disease
activity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC8.4
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
OC8.5
In vivo effects of repeated thyronamine (T0AM) administration in mice
Carolin Hofig1, Lisbeth Harder2, Assel Sarsenbayeva1, Lutz Schomburg1 &
Jens Mittag2
1Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Institut fur Experimentelle
Endokrinologie, Berlin, Germany;2Universitat zu Lubeck, Center of Brain
Behavior and Metabolism CBBM/Medizinische Klinik I, Lubeck, Germany.
Introduction
So far, only two representatives of thyronamines, namely 3-iodothyronamine
(3-T1AM) and the iodine-free thyronamine (T0AM), have been detected in vivo.
While intensive research is done on the
(patho-) physiological function of
3-T1AM, the physiological role of T0AM is poorly studied. Conflicting data have
been reported for the acute cardiac effects of T0AM. This project therefore
determined whether a repeated administration of T0AM affects cardiovascular
function, metabolism or thermoregulation.
Methods
C57BL/6J male mice were injected with a pharmacological dose of T0AM
(5 mg/kg/day, 7 days, i.p.). The mice were killed 24 h after the last injection, and
organs were collected for subsequent gene expression analysis.
Results
Daily administration of T0AM did not alter body weight, food or water intake,
heart  rate,  blood  pressure,  brown  adipose  tissue  thermogenesis  or  body
temperature  compared  to  sham-injected  controls.  There  was  no  significant
difference in hepatic glycogen content or mRNA expression of genes involved in
cardiac, blood pressure or metabolic control between the treatment groups. While
the thyroid hormone (TH) responsive genes Spot14 and selenoprotein S were
significantly up-regulated in liver after T0AM treatment, hepatic deiodinase 1
(Dio1) was unaffected, which is in line with unaltered levels of serum total T4 and
T3 concentrations. No significant effects were observed on hepatic or renal trace
element concentrations like Se, Cu, and Zn.
Conclusions
Our data demonstrate that T0AM displays only minor cardiovascular, metabolic
and thermoregulatory activity in mice upon repeated administration. T0AM does
not interfere with TH metabolism, and does not affect Dio1 as a most sensitive
hepatic TH-target genes or TH serum levels. Hence, T0AM may not constitute a
physiologically active TH metabolite.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC8.5
Endocrine Tumours
OC9.1
Study of new tumor suppressor gene (ZNRF3) in adrenocortical
carcinoma
Omeiri Hanin1,2, Weinandts Marthe1,4, Lefevre Lucile1, Drougat Ludivine1,
Assie Guillaume1,3, Rizk Rabin Marthe1,2, Bertherat Jerome1,4 &
Ragazzon Bruno1,2
1Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France;2Université Paris Descartes,
Sorbonne Paris cité, France;3Department of Endocrinology, Referral Center
for Rare Adrenal Diseases, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Cochin, Paris, France;4Université Paris Sud, PARIS, France.
Introduction
Adrenocortical Carcinoma (ACC) is a rare and aggressive tumor with poor
prognosis. Up to now, CTNNB1 (bcatenin) and TP53 mutations were the most
frequent alterations identified in ACC. By a combination of genomic approaches,
we have recently analyzed a cohort of 122 ACC (European Network for the Study
of Adrenal Tumors, ENSAT). This work confirmed recurrent alterations in
CTNNB1 and TP53 and revealed new genes not previously reported in ACC.
Strikingly, ZNRF3 (zinc and ring finger 3) was the most frequently altered gene
(21%). In a majority of cases, homozygous deletions of ZNRF3 were observed.
ZNRF3 had never been associated with other tumor types. This original finding
suggests that ZNRF3 could be a novel tumor suppressor gene involved in ACC.
Our objective is to demonstrate that ZNRF3 acts as a tumor suppressor gene in the
adrenocortical cell line (H295R) and to identify molecular pathways downstream
of ZNRF3.
Methods
To  investigate  the  potential  function  of  ZNRF3
on  apoptosis  and  cell
proliferation, we performed measurement of Caspase3 activity and MTT assay
in H295R cells, transfected with an interfering RNA targeting ZNRF3 or a vector
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
encoding ZNRF3. Then, to screen and identify new ZNRF3 binding partners we
performed  co-immunoprecipitation
(IP)-coupled  mass  spectrometry
(MS)
experiments from H295R cells transfected with ZNRF3.
Results
In H295R cells, ZNRF3 overexpression decreases cell proliferation and increases
apoptosis, while ZNRF3 silencing confers protection against apoptosis induced by
staurosporin. Different proteins partners of ZNRF3 were identified by coIP-MS,
involved in various cellular processes. The interaction of ZNRF3 with these
proteins is under investigation. Further experiments are required to identify the
corresponding signaling pathways.
Conclusion
Our  data  show  that  ZNRF3
plays  a  role  of  tumor  suppressor  gene  in
adrenocortical cells. The results of this research will help to progress toward
our understanding of adrenocortical tumorigenesis involving ZNRF3 alterations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC9.1
OC9.2
Role of luteinizing hormone receptor in the ontogeny and progression of
adrenocortical tumors in transgenic mice expressing SV40Tag under
the inhibin-a promoter
Milena Doroszko1, Marcin Chrusciel1,2, Kirstine Belling3,
Susanna Vuorenoja1, Marlene Dalgaard3, Henrik Leffers3, H Bjørn Nielsen3,
Ilpo Huhtaniemi1,4, Jorma Toppari1,5 & Nafis Rahman1,2
1Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland;2Department of Reproduction and Gynecological
Endocrinology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland;3Center
for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark,
Lyngby, Denmark;4Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology,
Imperial College London, London, UK;5Department of Pediatrics,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
We  analyzed  the  occurrence  of  adrenocortical  tumors  in  transgenic  mice
expressing Simian Virus 40 T antigen (SV40Tag) under the inhibin-a promoter
(inha/Tag) and searched for novel biomarker genes for the tumorigenesis. We
studied
2-,
4-,
6-mo-old  intact
(never  forming  tumors)  and  prepubertally
gonadectomized (GDX) inha/Tag mice (developing tumors) and similar groups
of wild-type mice as controls. Furthermore, the role of ectopic luteinizing
hormone receptor (Lhcgr) expression in the tumors was explored by cross-
breeding inha/Tag mice with Lhcgr deficient mice (inha/Tag/LuRKO) and by
treating tumor-bearing GDX inha/Tag mice with human chorionic gonadotropin
(5 IU/week/for 3 weeks). In both sexes, the expression of Grb10, Mmp24, Sgcd,
Rerg, Gnas, Nfatc1, Gnrhr, Igf2 was significantly downregulated; whereas that of
Esr1, PrlRL, Gata-4 and Lhcgr was upregulated in the tumorous vs. GDX wild-
type adrenal gland. Sex steroid enzyme genes (Srd5a1, Cyp19a1) were also
upregulated, but adrenal-specific steroidogenic enzymes (Cyp21a1, Cyp11b1,
Cyp11b2) downregulated. Inhibin-a expression was scattered throughout the
adrenal cortex of GDX inha/Tag mice. SV40Tag expression was restricted to
the upper layers of zona fasciculata in GDX inha/Tag mice, but in intact mice to
the subcapsular region, infiltrating cortex towards medulla along with aging/
tumor progression. Adrenal tumors failed to form in GDX inha/Tag/LuRKO
double transgenic mice. In vivo hCG treatment increased plasma progesterone
concentrations in GDX inha/Tag, but did not affect the tumor progression.
Taken together, our results suggest that adrenal LH/LHCGR function was a
prerequisite for tumor formation after GDX in Inha/Tag, but not required for
tumor progression. Downregulated genes found in the tumor tissues suggest their
necessity in the normal adrenocortical phenotype development. Upregulated
genes  may  serve  as  potential  biomarker  candidates  for  adrenocortical
tumorigenesis. The steroidogenic enzyme gene expression pattern in inha/Tag
mice  may  suggest  increased  sex  steroid  hormone  production
(androgens,
estrogens) at the expense of adrenal hormone steroidogenesis (corticosterone,
aldosterone).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC9.2
OC9.3
Stressed to death - antioxidant pathway targeting as a novel therapeutic
approach in adrenocortical carcinoma
Vasileios Chortis1,2, Angela E Taylor1,2, Craig L Doig1,2,
Eirini Meimaridou3, Louise A Metherell3, Wiebke Arlt1,2 & Paul A Foster1,2
1Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research (IMSR), Birmingham, UK;
2Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Birmingham Health
Partners, Birmingham, UK;3Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK.
Context
Nicotinamide  nucleotide  transhydrogenase
(NNT)  is  a  NADPH-generating
mitochondrial proton pump with a central role in mitochondrial antioxidant
pathways. Recent studies revealed inactivating NNT mutations in patients with
familial glucocorticoid deficiency, indicating a selective susceptibility of the
adrenal cortex to NNT deficiency and oxidative stress. Here we explored the
potential value of NNT as a therapeutic target in adrenocortical cancer.
Methods
We delineated the distinct effects of NNT loss on cellular proliferation and
steroidogenesis employing two in vitro knockdown models: transient, siRNA-
mediated  and  stable,  shRNA-mediated  NNT  silencing,  both  utilising  the
adrenocortical carcinoma cell line NCI-H295R.
Results
Transient NNT knockdown impaired cellular redox balance, as indicated by a
decline in the ratio of reduced to oxidised glutathione, and impeded cellular
proliferation (30G8% decrease in proliferation compared to scrambled siRNA-
transfected  cells,  P!0.01).  Importantly,  NNT-deficient  cells  also  became
exceedingly sensitive to chemically induced oxidative stress (55G10% loss of
cellular viability when co-treated with 20 mM Paraquat, P!0.01). After long-
term culture, H295R cells with stable NNT knockdown appeared to develop
compensatory  mechanisms,  with  evidence  of  improved  redox  balance  and
proliferative  potential.  This  adaptation  was  associated  with  alterations  in
glycolytic and oxygen consumption rates, as demonstrated by extracellular flux
analysis using Seahorse XF technology. Steroid profiling by liquid chromatog-
raphy-tandem mass spectrometry revealed a distinct profile induced by transient
NNT knockdown, surprisingly characterised by enhanced cortisol and androste-
nedione synthesis. This was underpinned by an increase in the activity of several
key steroidogenic enzymes including CYP11B1, CYP17A1 and CYP21A2.
Conclusion
Our study suggests a potential role of NNT inhibition as a novel therapeutic
approach in advanced adrenocortical carcinoma. Steroid profiling reveals  a
surprising increase in glucocorticoid and androgen synthesis in response to NNT
loss, challenging our current understanding of the complex association between
redox balance and adrenal function.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC9.3
OC9.4
The truncated somatostatin receptor sst5TMD4 is overexpressed in
prostate cancer, where it increases aggressiveness features by
regulating key tumor suppressors and oncogenes.
Daniel Hormaechea-Agulla1, Juan Manuel Jiménez-Vacas1,
Alejandro Iban˜ ez-Costa1, Enrique Gómez-Gómez2, Julia Carrasco-
Valiente2, José Valero Rosa2, María M Moreno3, Michael D Culler4,
Manuel D Gahete1, María José Requena2, Justo P Casta
˜o1 &
Raúl M Luque1
1Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of
Córdoba, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía (HURS), Instituto Maimónides
de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC), CIBERobn, Córdoba,
Spain;2Urology Service, HURS/IMIBIC., Córdoba, Spain;3Anatomo-
pathology Service, HURS/IMIBIC, Córdoba, Spain;4IPSEN Bioscience,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
Somatostatin  is a  pleiotropic  neuropeptide that  governs  multiple  biological
targets, including tumor cell function, through a family of G protein-coupled
receptors with 7-transmembrane domains (TMD), named sst1-5. However, we
recently discovered sst5TMD4, an aberrantly spliced, truncated (only 4-TMDs)
sst5-variant displaying unique molecular/functional features. sst5TM4 is over-
expressed  in  various  endocrine-related  tumors  exacerbating  their  malignant
characteristics. Here, we present the first analysis of the presence, pathological
relevance, functional role, and mechanisms of action of sst5TMD4 in human
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
prostate cancer (PCa). Specifically, samples from human PCa, normal prostate
(NP), and PCa cell lines (VCaP and PC3) were studied. Expression profiles were
determined by qPCR and functional consequences of sst5TMD4 overexpression/
inhibition were analyzed using different techniques. Intracellular mechanisms
triggered  by  sst5TMD4
overexpression  were  determined  using  commercial
arrays. Preclinical mouse models were used to study the in vivo consequences of
sst5TMD4 overexpression on tumor growth. Our results revealed that sst5TMD4
was overexpressed in PCa samples, and its expression was higher in patients with
metastatic PCa. In PCa cell lines, sst5TMD4 overexpression increased cell
proliferation  and  migration,  while  its  silencing  reduced  cell  proliferation.
sst5TMD4 overexpression stimulated key intracellular pathways involved in
PCa function, including ERK/JNK, MYC/MAX, WNT and RB, and, conse-
quently, altered the expression of tumor suppressors (APC, SFRP1, CDKN2A,
ZNF185) and oncogenes (CAV1, IL-6, DAXX). Notably, sst5TMD4-transfected
PC3 cells lost their usual response to somatostatin analogs in terms of calcium
kinetics, evidencing the disruption of normal functioning of somatostatin system
in PCa. Finally, nude mice injected with sst5TMD4 stably-transfected PC3 cells
presented larger tumors with increased proportion of necrosis. In conclusion,
sst5TMD4 is overexpressed in PCa, where it is associated to the presence of
metastasis, and promotes aggressiveness features in in vitro and in vivo models,
suggesting its potential value as biomarker and/or therapeutic target in PCa.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC9.4
OC9.5
Pituicytoma: a neuropathological analysis of 10 samples
Klaus Christian Mende1, Jakob Matschke2, Rolf Buslei3,
Michael Buchfelder4, Rudolf Fahlbusch5, Wolfgang Saeger2 &
Joerg Flitsch1
1Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center, Hamburg,
Germany;2Department of Neuropathology, University Medical Center
Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany;3Department of Neuropathology, University
of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany;4Department of Neurosurgery, University
of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany;5International Neuroscience Institute,
Hannover, Germany.
Introduction
Pituicytoma is a rare neoplasm of the sellar region, believed to originate from
neurohypophyseal cells. Tumor resection is the primary treatment option, but may
remain incomplete due to excessive bleeding of the well vascluarized tumor
stroma. Therefore the search for alternative or additional treatment regimens is
necessary. In a previous publication in 2012 the presence of VEGF-R was shown
in one tumor sample, potentially opening the door for modern treatment options.
However no series of pituicytomas was analyzed so far.
Material and methods
We analyzed pituicytoma samples collected from three institutions between 2006
and 2015. The tumor tissues were stained for VEGF, VEGFR, TTF1, SSTR 2,
SSTR 3, SSTR 5; furthermore the Ki67 fraction was determined. The strength of
the stainings were classified from 0Zno staining to CCCZstrong staining. A
complementary retrospective analysis of the patient charts regarding sex, age, and
primary symptoms, pituitary function, and peri- or postoperative complications
was performed.
Results
Ten samples were analyzed; mean patient age was 57.8 years C-16.3 years.
Seven samples were acquired from male patients (one relapse) and three from
female. All tumors stained strongly positive (CCC) for VEGF-R. VEGF was
unavailable in six samples, did not stain in 3 and was slightly positive (C) in one
sample. Six samples stained positive for TTF1. As for somatostatin receptors,
three samples were slightly positive for SSTR2; seven were negative. SSTR3 was
C in 1, 3 were CC, 3 were CCC and 3 were 0. SSTR 5 stained CCC in 1,
CC in 5, C in 1 and 0 in three patients. Ki67 was unavailable for seven samples;
it was 5% for two samples and 10% in one.
Conclusion
All pituicytomas stained strongly positive for the VEGF receptor presence thus
indicating a possible treatment option through targeted therapies in cases where
resection remains insufficient. Further research is necessary as to whether tumor
growth can be inhibited using this pathway.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC9.5
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Reproduction & Endocrine Disruption
OC10.1
Systemic enamel pathologies may be due to anti-androgenic effects of
some endocrine disruptors
Katia Jedeon1,2, Sophia Loiodice1, Sophia Houari1,2, Manon Lenormand1,
Ariane Berdal1,2 & Sylvie Babajko1,2
1Laboratory of Molecular Oral Pathophysiology, Cordeliers Research
Center, INSERM UMRS 1138, 15 rue de l’école de médecine - Paris,
France;2Paris-Diderot University, UFR Odontology, Paris, France;3Centre
de Référence des maladies rares de la face et de la cavité buccale MAFACE
hôpital Rothschild, AP-HP, Paris, France.
There has been increasing concerns over the last 20 years about the potential
adverse  effects  of  endocrine  disruptors
(EDs).  Anecdotally,  molar  incisor
hypomineralization (MIH), a recently described enamel pathology, now affecting
15-18% of 6-9 years old children, is increasing concurrently with ED related
pathologies. Our previous data show that bisphenol A (BPA) and vinclozolin, two
anti-androgenic EDs, impact amelogenesis and enamel mineralization preferen-
tially in male rats and generate similar enamel defects as those described for MIH.
The resulting irreversible enamel defects may provide an easily accessible marker
for reporting early ED exposure in humans. The aim of the present study was to
decipher the mechanism of action of low-dose ED during amelogenesis.
Wistar rats were exposed to low-dose EDs from the first day of gestation to
30 days after birth. Global transcriptomic analysis showed BPA and vinclozolin
modulated the expression of a small group of genes directly involved in enamel
mineralization, among them the protease KLK4 and the ion-exchanger SLC5A8
which  are  crucial  for  amelogenesis.  Analysis  of  the  ED  putative  receptor
expression pattern showed that in contrary to estrogen receptor a (ERa) which is
mainly expressed by ameloblastic precursors, androgen receptor (AR) was three-
to fivefold more expressed in full differentiated ameloblasts responsible of enamel
mineralization. In vivo and in vitro analysis carried out on the rat ameloblastic cell
line HAT-7 and human androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cells LNCaP showed
AR  nuclear  translocation  upon  testosterone  treatment,  and  testosterone
up-regulation of two enamel specific gene expression (KLK4 and SLC5A8).
This induction occurred at the transcriptional level and was inhibited by siRNAs
directed against AR as well as by vinclozolin and BPA.
In conclusion, we report that i) dental epithelial cells are sensitive to estrogens and
androgens, ii) amelogenesis is modulated by androgens and that iii) two anti-
androgenic  EDs,  BPA  and  vinclozolin,  irreversibly  disrupt  this  process
preferentially in male rats by modulating the transcription of enamel specific
genes. We thus provide evidence of hormonal influence on amelogenesis and
probably on sexual differences of enamel quality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC10.1
OC10.2
Human luteinizing hormone (hLH) and chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
display biased agonism at the LH/CG receptor
Laura Riccetti1, Mohammed Akli Ayoub2,3, Daniele Klett2,
Romain Yvinec2, Nathalie Gallay2, Yves Combarnous2, Livio Casarini1,4,
Manuela Simoni1,4 & Eric Reiter2
1Unit of Endocrinology, Department of Biomedicine, Metabolism and
Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy;
2Biologie et Bioinformatique des Systèmes de Signalisation (BIOS) group,
INRA, UMR85, Unitè Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comporte-
ments; CNRS, UMR7247, F-37380, Nouzilly, France;3LE STADIUM
Loire Valley Institute for Advanced Studies, F-45000 Orlèans, France;
4Center for Genome Research, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Modena, Italy.
Human luteinizing hormone (LH) and human choriogonadotropin (hCG) were
considered biologically equivalent for decades due to structural similarities and
binding to the same receptor (LHCGR). However, LHCGR triggers differential,
LH-  and  hCG-specific,  cAMP  production,  steroidogenesis,  ERK  and  AKT
activation and gene expression in granulosa cells. Besides the Gs/cAMP/PKA
pathway,  hCG  and  LH  bioactivity  on  b-arrestin-  and  Gq/PLC-dependent
pathways are yet to be determined. We compared the abilities of recombinant
hLH and hCG to elicit cAMP and inositol phosphate production, b-arrestin 2
activation and recruitment, as well as steroids production in two cell models:
i) human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells transiently expressing LHCGR;
ii) mouse Leydig tumour cells (mLTC-1), endogenously expressing the murine
LH receptor. Bioluminescence/fluorescence resonance energy transfer (BRET/-
FRET) technologies were used, allowing quantitative analysis of hCG/hLH
activities in real-time in living cells treated by increasing doses of gonadotropins
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
(1 pM-1 mM). Both hormones trigger identical maximal cAMP response, with the
EC50 of hCG 30 times lower than that of hLH (12.91G1.48 pM versus 378.6G1.2
pM, respectively) (Mann-Whitney’s U-test; P!0.05; nZ4). hLH clearly led to
weaker maximal response of progesterone production than hCG (hCGZ94.36G
3.1%; LHZ41.46G4.1%; t-test; P!0.05; nZ3), exhibiting partial agonism for
steroids synthesis. IP1 production and b-arrestin responses confirmed the biased
actions of the two hormones. EC50  values measured for IP1 production were
higher compared to EC50s obtained for cAMP, indicating that higher receptor
occupancy must be reached to recruit Gaq than Gas. Moreover, we found that
hLH  led  to  partial  maximal  b-arrestin
2
recruitment,  with
5-fold  lower
potency  compared  to  hCG
(hLHZ0.14G0.008  versus  hCGZ0.2G0.008;
Mann-Whitney’s U-test; P!0.05; nZ4). These results challenge the traditional
view that hLH and hCG are biologically equivalent, since they trigger clearly
different intracellular responses and suggest that these pleiotropic gonadotropins
could act as natural biased agonists in vivo, opening novel pathophysiological
scenarios.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC10.2
OC10.3
LHCGR signaling promotes gonadal-like cell differentiation and
proliferation in gonadectomy-induced adrenocortical tumorigenesis in
mice
Marcin Chrusciel1,2, Milena Doroszko1, Meike Jakobi1, Michal Brouze1,
Donata Ponikwicka-Tyszko3, Piotr Bernaczyk4, Slawomir Anisimowicz5,
Slawomir Wolczynski2,3, Jorma Toppari1,6, Ilpo Huhtaniemi1,7 &
Nafis Rahman1,2
1Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland;2Department of Reproduction and Gynecological Endo-
crinology, Medical University of Bialystok, Biolystok, Poland;3Institute of
Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Olsztyn, Poland;4Department of Pathology, Medical University of
Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland;5Center of Gynecology and Reproductive
Endocrinology Artemida, Bialystok, Poland;6Department of Pediatrics,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland;7Institute of Reproductive and
Developmental Biology, Imperial College London, London, UK.
Adrenocortical tumorigenesis in prepubertally gonadectomized (GDX) DBA/2J
mice has been attributed to chronically elevated luteinizing hormone (LH) and
ectopic expression of luteinizing hormone receptor (LHCGR) and GATA-4
transcription factor. We analyzed now the mechanistic role of LH-LHCGR
activation in GDX-induced adrenocortical tumorigenesis in intact and ovari-
ectomized (OVX) wild-type (WT) and Lhcgr-/-  mice in the DBA/2J genetic
background mice, or by treating OVX DBA/2J mice with gonadotropin-releasing
hormone antagonist (GnRH-a, Cetrorelix; 2.3 mg/kg/24 h for 21 days). The
adrenal glands of 6 mo-old OVX Lhcgr-/- mice were significantly smaller than
their haploinsufficient (Lhcgr+/-) or OVX WT control littermates. Histopathology
of OVX Lhcgr-/- adrenals showed lack of gonadal-like sex-steroid producing large
lipid-laden cells, termed B cells, whereas non-steroidogenic GATA-4-positive
spindle-shaped cells, known as A cells, were observed in both intact and OVX
Lhcgr-/-  mice. Furthermore, OVX Lhcgr-/-  mouse adrenals displayed down-
regulated gonad-specific markers Foxl2, Spinwl1, Cyp19 and Ers2. Lack of sex
steroid producing B cells in Lhcgr-/-  adrenals resulted in decreased plasma
estradiol and progesterone levels and significantly smaller uterus vs. WT control.
GnRH-a treatment of 12 mo-old OVX DBA/2J mice significantly reduced the
weight  of  adrenal  glands,  followed  by  the  downregulated  expression  of
proliferation marker Mki67, gonad-specific genes Lhcgr, Cyp19, Spinlw1 and
GATA-4 co-regulator Zfpm2. Taken together, these data provides evidence for
LHCGR signaling promoting the differentiation and proliferation of neoplastic
sex steroidogenic B cells in GDX-induced adrenocortical tumorigenesis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC10.3
OC10.4
Impaired adipose function in PCOS - evidence that the primary
abnormalities are in subcutaneous rather than visceral fat
Katarzyna Siemienowicz1, Flavien Coukan2, Avigdor Lerner3,
Stephen Franks3, Mick Rae2 & Colin Duncan1
1MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK;2Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK;3Imperial
College London, London, UK.
Central obesity and increased visceral adipose tissue (VAT) are key factors
contributing to metabolic dysfunction in PCOS. We therefore hypothesized that
there would be alterations in the morphology and function of adipocytes from
visceral fat depots. The female offspring of pregnant sheep treated biweekly with
either 100 mg of testosterone propionate (TP) or vehicle control (C) from day
62-102 of gestation develop a clinically realistic PCOS-like condition. They
develop hyperinsulinaemia and early fatty liver changes in adolescence followed
by increases in body weight and adiposity in adulthood.
We examined adipose tissue development and function in PCOS-like sheep
during fetal life (D112: CZ9; TPZ4), before puberty (11 weeks: CZ8; TPZ8),
at adolescence (11 months: CZ5; TPZ9) and in adulthood (30 months: CZ11;
TPZ4).
Impaired adipocyte differentiation was not observed in fetal or early life. There
were  no  differences  in  the  expression  of  the  master  adipogenic  regulators
(PPARG, CEBPA, CEBPB) or markers of fully differentiated adipocytes (LEP,
ADIPOQ,  PLIN1,  LPL)  in  VAT  of  adolescent  sheep,  however  all  were
downregulated in the subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) (P!0.05-0.01). This
altered adipogenesis in SAT was accompanied by increased expression of TNF
and HIF1A (P!0.05) and correlated with increased fasting Free Fatty Acids
(FFA)  (rZ0.55; P!0.05).  As adults  PCOS-like sheep  had decreased  total
adipocyte  numbers
(P!0.05)  and  increased  mean  adipocyte  size  in  SAT
(P!0.05) but not in VAT. SAT hypertrophy was associated with increased
expression of CCL2, TNF and IL6 (P!0.05-0.01) and correlated with increased
fasting FFA (rZ0.61; P!0.05).
Altered adipogenesis in SAT, rather than VAT, of PCOS-like sheep correlates
with onset of puberty and hyperinsulinaemia. Impaired preadipocyte differen-
tiation in SAT in adolescents results in hypertrophy and inflammation of adult
SAT. This consequently lowers capacity of SAT to safely store fat and potentially
explains metabolic perturbations observed in PCOS-like female sheep.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC10.4
OC10.5
Effect of clomiphene citrate and metformin on testosterone levels in
hypogonadal obese men with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or type 2
diabetes (DM2)
Carla Pelusi1,2, Vito Giagulli3,4, Margherita Baccini1, Flaminia Fanelli1,2,
Marco Mezzullo1,2, Alessia Fazzini1,2, Elena Casadio1, Olga Prontera1,
Uberto Pagotto1,2 & Renato Pasquali1
1University of Bologna, Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medical
and Surgical Sciences, Bologna, Italy;2University of Bologna, Center for
Applied Biomedical Research, Bologna, Italy;3University of Bari,
Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Bari, Italy;4Conversano Hospital,
Outpatient Clinic for Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Conversano,
Italy.
Low  testosterone (T)  levels are often  found in obese  men with metabolic
abnormalities, however the mechanism underling this condition is unclear. This
study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of clomiphene citrate (CC) in increasing
T levels and improving metabolic control in hypogonadal obese men with IGT or
DM2. A randomized cross-over double blind controlled study was conducted in
twenty obese hypogonadal caucasian men, mean age 47 ys, classified in IGT
(nZ11) or DM2 (nZ9). Participants were assigned to receive either 25 mg/day of
CC plus 2 g/day of metformin (MET) or placebo plus 2 g/day of MET for
3 months. After 6 weeks wash-out period, subjects were moved to the alternate
arm for additional 3 months. Inclusion criteria were age (35-56 ys), BMIO 30
kg/m2, T level ! 3 ng/ml and glycemia compatible with IGT or DM2. At baseline
and at the end of each phase, BMI, glycemia, T and E2 were evaluated. T and E2
were measured by LC/MS-MS. In the CCCMET treatment phase, T and E2
levels increased significantly compared to baseline (TZ2.91G0.76 ng/ml vs
5.86G1.69 ng/ml, P!0.001; E2Z24G8 pg/ml vs 49G21 pg/ml, P!0.001)
whereas glycemia and BMI decreased (glycemiaZ105 G 24 mg/dl vs 99G26
mg/dl, P!0.019; BMIZ36.0G5.9 kg/m2  vs 35.4G 5.7 kg/m2; P!0.007).
Indeed, in the placebo C MET phase no significant changes in any of these
parameters were observed. The sex-hormonal changes were similar in IGT and
DM2 subjects. Only CC C MET therapy was able to significantly increase serum
T levels in all participants independently of the metabolic state and to reduce BMI
and glycemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC10.5
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Bone & Calcium Homeostasis
OC11.1
An increase of bone mineral density in male-to-female and female-
to-male transgender persons after one year cross-sex hormonal
treatment
Chantal Wiepjes1, Mariska Vlot1,2, Maartje Klaver1, Renate de Jongh1,
Paul Lips1, Annemieke Heijboer2, Alessandra Fisher3, Thomas Schreiner4,
Guy T’Sjoen5 & Martin den Heijer1
1Department of Internal Medicine and Center of Expertise on Gender
Dysphoria, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
2Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands;3Sexual Medicine and Andrology Unit,
Department of Experimental, Clinical and Biomedical Sciences, University
of Florence, Florence, Italy;4Department of Endocrinology, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway;5Department of Endocrinology, Oslo University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
Introduction
Estrogen has positive effects on bone mineral density (BMD), in particular in
trabecular bone through inhibition of bone resorption. Testosterone increases
bone size, but the effect on BMD is less clear. Cross-sex hormonal treatment
(CSHT) in transgender individuals can affect BMD. Therefore, the aim of this
study is to investigate effects of CSHT on BMD during the first year of treatment
in male-to-female (MtFs) and female-to-male (FtMs) transgender persons.
Methods
This is a prospective observational study and part of ENIGI (European Network
for Investigation of Gender Incongruence). 188 adults who completed one year of
CSHT  were  included.  In
99
FtMs  and
89
MtFs  a  dual-energy  X-ray
absorptiometry was performed to measure lumbar spine (LS) and total hip
(TH) BMD before and after one year CSHT. FtMs received intramuscular
testosterone undecanoate (1000mg/12 weeks), testosterone gel (50mg/day) or
testosterone esters intramuscular
(250mg/2 weeks). MtFs were treated with
cyproteronacetate
(50mg/day)  in  combination  with  oral  estradiol  valerate
(2-4mg/day) or an estradiol patch (200ug/week). Analyses were stratified for
calcium with colecalciferol (CaD3) use.
Results
In FtMs the mean LS BMD increased with 1.00% (95%CI 0.15 - 1.85%) and
the mean TH BMD with 0.91% (95%CI 0.29 - 1.53%). In MtFs, the mean LS
and TH BMD increased with 3.72% (95%CI 2.85 - 4.59%) and 1.52% (95%CI
0.90 - 2.14%), respectively. In MtFs who used CaD3, BMD increased more
than in patients who did not use this: 4.87% (95%CI 3.49 - 6.25%) vs. 2.86%
(95%CI 1.76 - 3.95%) in LS, and 2.33% (95%CI 1.27 - 3.38%) vs. 0.92%
(95%CI 0.18 - 1.66%) in TH. In FtMs, use of CaD3 did not influence the change
of LS or TH BMD.
Conclusion
After one year CSHT BMD increases in MtFs more than in FtMs, particularly in
lumbar spine. This confirms the role of estrogen on bone in biological males.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC11.1
OC11.2
Associations of insulin sensitivity with cortical bone geometry in healthy
adult men
Charlotte Verroken1,2, Hans Zmierczak1, Stefan Goemaere1,
Jean-Marc Kaufman1,2 & Bruno Lapauw1,2
1Unit for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium;2Department of Endocrinology, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
Objective
In type 2 diabetes mellitus, fracture risk is increased despite preserved BMD. This
might in part be due to insulin resistance affecting bone geometry; however,
studies investigating the associations of insulin sensitivity with bone geometry are
lacking. We aimed to explore this relationship in a cohort of healthy, young adult
men.
Methods
In 1001 healthy men aged 25-45 years, cortical bone geometry was assessed
using pQCT (radius and tibia, 66% from distal end point). Insulin and glucose
were measured from fasting serum samples; insulin resistance was evaluated
using the homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
In age and BMI-adjusted analyses, HOMA-IR and insulin levels correlated
inversely with periosteal circumference (PC), endosteal circumference (EC) and
polar strength-strain index
(SSIp) at both the radius
(PC: both ßZK0.13,
P!0.001;  EC:  ßZK0.08,  P%0.031;  SSIp:  ßZK0.14
and  ßZK0.16,
P!0.001) and tibia (PC: ßZK0.12, P!0.001; EC: ßZK0.10 and ßZK0.09,
P%0.007; SSIp: ßZK0.10, P%0.003). Moreover, insulin levels but not HOMA-
IR  correlated  inversely  with  cortical  thickness  at  the  radius
(ßZK0.07,
PZ0.048). After adjustment for DXA-derived body composition (total fat and
lean body mass) instead of BMI, the associations of HOMA-IR and insulin with
PC and SSIp at both the radius and tibia and with EC at the tibia remained
significant (ßRK0.11, P%0.019), whereas the associations of HOMA-IR and
insulin with EC and the association of insulin with cortical thickness at the radius
lost significance.
Conclusion
In this cohort of healthy young men, insulin sensitivity correlates with cortical
bone size at least in part independently of body composition. Given the important
contribution of bone geometry to overall bone strength, this might contribute to
the paradoxically increased fracture risk in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Whether this association is a direct consequence of impaired insulin signaling in
bone tissue or reflects indirect effects through modulation of the muscle-bone
relationship remains to be established.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC11.2
OC11.3
Ultra-trail marathon induces bone response in association with acute
and established metabolic changes
Giovanni Lombardi1, Veronica Sansoni1, Silvia Perego1,
Gianluca Vernillo2,3, Federico Schena3,4, Giampiero Merati2,5,
Andrea Baruti6,7, Antonio La Torre2 & Giuseppe Banfi1,8
1I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Laboratory of Experimentak
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Milano, Italy;2University of Milano,
Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Milano, Italy;3University of
Verona, Research Center for Sport, Mountain & Health, Rovereto, Italy;
4University of Verona, Department of Neurological & Movement Sciences,
Verona, Italy;5IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, Milano, Italy;
6University of Milano, Department of Biosciences, Milano, Italy;
7University of Milano, Centro Interuniversitario di Medicina Molecolare e
Biofisica Applicata (CIMMBA), Milano, Italy;8Vita-Salute San Raffaele
University, Milano, Italy.
Introduction
Bone and energy metabolisms are deeply related determining a two-way street
aimed in regulating the energy utilization [1]. Mountain ultra-marathons are
peculiar aerobic performances hardly proving whole body homeostasis [2]. In this
study  we  aimed  at  investigating  and  characterizing  the  metabolic  profile
(hormones involved in energy metabolism), the metabolic inflammation profile
(adipokines), the bone metabolism (bone turnover markers), and their integration
(mediated by osteocalcin [3]) both in experienced ultra-marathon runners and
control subjects.
Methods
Serum concentrations of bone turnover markers (pro-collagen type I N-terminal
propeptide, carboxylated/undercarboxylated osteocalcin), measured by ELISA,
and metabolic hormones (C-peptide, insulin, glucagon, glucagon-like peptide,
gastric-inhibitory peptide, ghrelin, leptin, resistin, and visfatin), measured by
fluorescent-based multiplex assay, were compared before and after a 65-km
mountain ultra-marathon in 17 trained runners and in 12 age-matched controls
with a low physical activity profile.
Results
After the race, runners experienced a reduction in pro-collagen type I N-terminal
propeptide (P! 0.05), although it remained higher than in controls (P! 0.05),
while  carboxylated  osteocalcin  remained  unchanged.  Among  the  metabolic
hormones, only glucagon and leptin were different between runners at rest and
controls. C-peptide and leptin decreased after the race in runners, while glucagon,
glucagon-like  peptide
1,  resistin,  and  visfatin  were  increased
(P! 0.01).
Undercarboxylated  osteocalcin  was  decreased
(50%,  P!  0.05)  and  highly
correlated with insulin and C-peptide (rZ0.65, P! 0.01).
Conclusions
In order to keep homeostasis, the energy use is strikingly regulated at expenses of
bone metabolism. Undercarboxylated osteocalcin changes clearly mark the global
energy needs of the body.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC11.3
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
OC11.4
The prevalence of GNAS deficiency-related diseases in a large cohort of
patients characterized by the EuroPHP network
Francesca Marta Elli1, Agnes Linglart2,3, Intza Garin4, Luisa de Sanctis5,
Paolo Bordogna1, Virginie Grybek2,3, Arrate Pereda4, Federica Giachero5,
Elisa Verrua1, Giovanna Mantovani1 & Guiomar Perez de Nanclares4
1Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Depart-
ment of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan,
Endocrinology and Diabetology Unit, Milano, Italy;2APHP, Reference
center for rare disorders of the mineral metabolism and Plateforme
d’expertise Paris Sud Maladies Rares, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France;
3INSERM U1169, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, et Université Paris-
Saclay, Paris, France;4Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba
National Health Institute, Hospital Universitario Araba-Txagorritxu,
Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain;5Department of Public Health and Pediatrics,
University of Turin, Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Health and
Science City, Torino, Italy.
The clinical condition resulting from end-organ resistance to parathormone
(rPTH),  caused  by
(epi)genetic  alterations  of  GNAS,  was  termed  as
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
(PHP).  The  high  phenotype  heterogeneity,  the
existence of additional clinical features such as resistance to other hormones
(TSH/GHRH/gonadotropins) and Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO),
led to the distinction of specific PHP subtypes.
The purpose  of the present work is to provide data about PHP-associated
molecular  defects  prevalence.  We  collected  in  a  specifically  designed
questionnaire the data from all the patients (pts) characterized by 3 laboratories
members of the EuroPHP network, i.e. 407 pts.
Isolated rPTH (126/407, 31%) was caused only by epigenetic defects, as 70% of
pts had a loss of imprinting (LoI) affecting all GNAS DMRs and 30% a loss of
methylation (LoM) restricted to the A/B DMR. Multihormone resistance with no
AHO signs (61/407, 15%) was essentially due to epigenetic defects, 64% to broad
LoI and 26% to LoM A/B, although a 10% of pts had a point mutation.
In pts with rPTH and AHO (40/407, 10%), the percentage of point mutation
grown up to 28% and methylation defects reduced (59% broad LoI and 13% LoM
at A/B). In pts with multihormone resistance and AHO (155/407, 38%), we found
all types of molecular defects; in particular, most pts were affected by GNAS point
mutations (81%), while the remaining cases were due to either large deletions
involving GNAS (6%), or broad LoI (10%) or isolated LoM at A/B (3%). Finally,
isolated AHO (18/407, 4%) and POH (7/407, 2%) were caused by point mutations
only.
To conclude, this work allowed us, for the first time, to quantify the prevalence of
different (epi)genetic lesions in PHP pts. As outcome, we plan to derive objective
criteria to guide a cost-efficient strategy of genetic testing and to examine the
implications for management and prognosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC11.4
OC11.5
Effects of vitamin D supplementation on respiratory muscle strength
and physical performance in patients with COPD: a pilot trial
Rachida Rafiq1, Henk-Jan Prins2, Wim Boersma2, Hans Daniëls3,
Martin den Heijer1, Paul Lips1 & Renate de Jongh1
1Department of Internal Medicine and Endocrinology, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;2Department of Pulmonary
Diseases, Medical Center Alkmaar, Alkmaar, The Netherlands;3Depart-
ment of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
Introduction
Although vitamin D is well known for its function in calcium homeostasis and
bone mineralisation, several studies have shown an effect on physical function
and muscle strength. Also, vitamin D has been associated with pulmonary
function and the incidence of airway infections. As vitamin D deficiency is highly
prevalent in COPD-patients, supplementation might have a beneficial effect in
these patients.
Objective
To assess the effect of vitamin D supplementation on respiratory muscle strength
and physical performance in vitamin D-deficient COPD-patients. Secondary
outcomes were exacerbation rate, pulmonary function and quality of life.
Methods
We performed  a  randomised,  double-blind, placebo-controlled  pilot  trial.
Participants were randomly allocated to receive 1200 IU vitamin D3 per day
(nZ24) or a placebo (nZ26) during 6 months. Study visits were conducted at
baseline, at 3 and at 6 months after randomisation. During the visits blood was
collected, respiratory muscle strength was measured (maximum inspiratory and
expiratory pressure (kPa), MIP and MEP respectively), physical performance
tests were performed (3-meter walking test, tandem test, chair-stands test and
6-minutes walking test) and pulmonary function was assessed. In addition, during
the whole study period participants kept a diary card in which they registered
respiratory symptoms.
Results
At baseline, both groups were deficient (mean serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
(25(OH)D) in nmol/L (S.D.): 42.3(15.2) and 40.6(17.0) in the vitamin D and
placebo-group respectively). Participants with vitamin D supplementation had a
significant increase in 25(OH)D compared to the placebo-group after 6 months
(mean difference (S.D.): 52.8(29.8) vs. 12.3(25.1), P!0.001). Pulmonary muscle
strength did not differ between the groups after 6 months (mean difference
MIP(S.D.): K0.28(1.43) and 0.25(1.23), PZ0.215; mean difference MEP(S.D.):
0.92(3.37) and 0.51(2.07), PZ0.649). Also, no differences were found in physical
performance, exacerbation rate, pulmonary function or quality of life.
Conclusion
Vitamin  D  supplementation  did  not  affect  respiratory  muscle  strength  and
physical performance in vitamin D-deficient COPD-patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC11.5
Obesity
OC12.1
Functional characterization of naturally occurring mutations in the
melanocortin receptor accesory protein 2 (MRAP2)
Heike Biebermann1, Laura Schonnop2, Nikolas Herrfurth2, Anna-
Lena Volckmar2, Anne Muller1, Triinu Peters2, Stephan Herpertz3,
Jochen Antel2, Johannes Hebebrand2, Gunnar Kleinau1 & Anke Hinney2
1Charité Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Institut fur Experimentelle Pädia-
trische Endokrinologie, Berlin, Germany;2Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-
Essen, Essen, Germany;3Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and
Psychotherapy, LWL University Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum,
Bochum, Germany.
Introduction
The  melanocortin
4 receptor
(MC4R)  is  the  most  important  hypothalamic
expressed G protein coupled receptor in weight regulation. Mutations in the
MC4R are the most frequent genetic cause of obesity. Recently an accessory
protein of the MC4R (melanocortin receptor accessory protein 2, MRAP2) was
discovered that was found to play a role in body weight regulation. MRAP2
deficient mice develop early-onset obesity. The mechanisms of disturbed weight
regulation is potentially a role of MRAP2 at MC4R function. However, naturally
occurring mutant MRAP2 were yet not been identified and the impact of MRAP
variants for regulation of signaling properties of the MC4R were not characterized
so far.
Methods
Mutational screening and determination of cAMP accumulation by AlphaScreen
technology.
Results
By screening for MRAP2 mutations in nearly 200 obese children and over 180
lean controls, we detected three non-synonymous MRAP2 variants which are all
heterozygous in the patients. For functional characterization of the three non-
synonymous MRAP2 variants, we established an experimental procedure to
characterize MRAP2 mediated effects on MC4R signaling. Characterization of
the three mutations revealed for only for one MRAP2 variant a significant
decrease in MC4R signaling in comparison to MC4R signaling in presence of
MRAP2  wild-type.  We  also  tested  different  transfection  ratios  between
MC4R/MRAP2 and determined MC4R signaling after alpha-MSH challenge.
This experiment demonstrated that the impact of MRAP2 on MC4R function is
dependent on the ratio between MC4R to MRAP2, which can be modified by
mutations in MRAP2 pointing to the fact that MRAP2 might act in a dimeric state.
Conclusion
For the first time we describe a mode of action for the MRAP2/MC4R complex
and provide hints for a relevance of this complex for body weight regulation in
humans.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC12.1
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
OC12.2
Female 5b-reductase knockout mice are protected from diet induced
obesity, insulin resistance and glucose intolerance
Laura Gathercole1, Matthew Chapman2, Dean Larner2, Petra Klusonova3,
Trevor Penning4, Gareth Lavery2, Alex Odermatt3 & Jeremy Tomlinson1
1University of Oxford, Oxford, UK;2University of Birmingham, Birming-
ham, UK;3University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland;4University of
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, USA.
Steroid hormones and bile acids are potent regulators of metabolic phenotype.
The enzyme 5b-Reductase (AKR1D1) has a crucial role in bile acid synthesis and
also generates 5b-reduced dihydrosteroid metabolites, regulating intra-cellular
steroid availability though the clearance of cortisol, testosterone, androstenedione
and progesterone. As AKR1D1 sits at the interface of bile acid synthesis and
steroid metabolism, we have hypothesised that it plays a key role in metabolic
homeostasis and have generated and characterised an entirely novel, global
AKR1D1 knockout (KO) mouse.
As expected AKR1D1KO mice had altered hepatic steroid (in vitro cortisone
clearance:
100% [WT], 70% [KO]; in vitro 5a-cortisone/cortisol generation
100% [WT], 390% [KO]) and bile acid metabolism (hepatic bile concentration
males: 1164G626 pmol/mg [WT], 122G42 pmol/mg [KO] P!0.05; females:
310G67 pmol/mg [WT], 113G23 pmol/mg [KO] P!0.01). At 10 weeks, KO
animals were the same weight as wildtype (WT) littermates with no differences in
glucose tolerance. Mice were challenged with a further 20-weeks of high fat diet
feeding whereon female, but not male, AKR1D1KO mice were protected from
diet induced weight gain (weight gain males: 21.8 gG0.9 g [WT], 21.4 gG0.7 g
[KO] PZns; females: 27.2 gG0.5 g [WT], 15.8 gG1.2 g [KO] P!0.01), with
reduced adipose tissue mass across all depots (gonadal: 4.0 gG0.2 g [WT],
2.4 gG0.4 g [KO] P!0.005; subcutaneous: 3.9 gG0.3 g [WT], 2.4 gG0.5 g
[KO] P!0.05; mesenteric: 1.9 gG0.2 g [WT], 1.2 gG0.3 g [KO] P!0.05), but
with preserved lean mass. Female AKR1D1KO mice were also protected from the
metabolic consequences of the high fat diet, with improved glucose tolerance
(ipGTT  AUC  females:
3216
mMol!min  [WT],  2601  mMol!min  [KO]
P!0.05) and enhanced insulin sensitivity (ipITT AUC females: 1171 mMol!
min [WT], 947 mMol!min [KO]).
AKR1D1KO mice display a sexually dimorphic metabolic phenotype, where
female mice are protected from the adverse metabolic effects of a high fat diet.
Although the underpinning mechanisms remain to be fully defined, AKR1D1 may
represent a future novel therapeutic target for the treatment of metabolic disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC12.2
OC12.3
Effects of weight loss and long-term weight maintenance with diets
varying in protein and glycemic index on circulating pro-neurotensin in
the Diet, Obesity, and Genes (DiOGenes) Study: a randomized,
controlled trial
Natalia Rudovich1,2, Wolfgang Bernigau1, Olga Pivovarova1,2,
Martin Osterhoff1,2, Andrea Sparwasser3, Andreas Bergmann3,
Joachim Struck3, Marleen A van Baak4, Susan A Jebb5, Angeliki Papadaki6,
J Alfredo Martinez7, Teodora Handjieva-Darlenska8, Marie Kunesova9,
Jorg Hager10, Armand Valsesia10, Nathalie Viguerie11,
Dominique Langin11, Arne Astrup12, Wim H M Saris4 &
Andreas F H Pfeiffer1,2
1German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Nuthetal,
Germany;2Charite’ Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, Germany;3Sphingotec
GmbH, Berlin, Germany;4NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology, and
Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The
Netherlands;5Medical Research Council Human Nutrition Research, Elsie
Widdowson Laboratory, Cambridge, UK;6Department of Social Medicine,
Preventive Medicine, and Nutrition Clinic, University of Crete, Heraklion,
Greece;7Department of Physiology and Nutrition, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain;8Department of Human Nutrition, Dietetics, and
Metabolic Diseases, National Transport Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria;9Obesity
Management Centre, Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic;
10Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA, Lausanne, Switzerland;11Obesity
Research Laboratory, Institute of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases,
Inserm, Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France;12Department of
Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, Faculty of Science, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Aims
Elevated levels of neurotensin (NT), a neurotransmitter and postprandial secreted
intestinal  hormone,  are  associated  with  an  increased  risk  of  diabetes,
cardiovascular disease and breast cancer. Here we studied the regulation of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
circulating pro-NT (a stable NT precursor fragment) by weight loss and dietary
interventions.
Methods
DiOGenes is a pan-European controlled dietary intervention study in overweight
adults who first lost body weight on an 8-week low-calorie diet (800 kcal/day) and
were then randomized to 1 of 5 ad libitum diets for 26 weeks. The diets were
either high (HPI) or low (LPI) protein or high (HGI) or low (LGI) glycemic index
in 4 combinations or control.
Results
Weight loss (11.2G3.5 kg; P!0.001) reduced pro-NT (202.6G117.8 pmol/l to
186.5G96.1 pmol/l; PZ0.007) and was similar in both genders. During the
weight maintenance period, pro-NT showed a trend to increase among both
genders assigned to HGI diets (m/w; PZ0.11 and PZ0.08), and no changes of
pro-NT in LGI diets. LPI increased pro-NT levels in male subjects (PZ0.003),
and no changes in HPI. In women, both HPI and LPI had no effects on circulating
pro-NT. Additionally we divided subjects in three groups depended on baseline
pro-NT values. Subjects with “low-proNT” (values !25th percentile) showed an
increase of pro-NT after weight-loss followed by small decrease in the 26-week
weight maintenance period. In contrast, the subjects with “high-proNT” (values
O75th percentile) showed an opposite response. No differences were observed in
anthropometrical or biochemical parameters between three quartiles at baseline.
“Low-proNT” stratum showed lower weight under both LGI-diets (PZ0.046).
Discussion
Our data suggest that a pro-NT reduction after weight loss is better maintained by
LGI and HPI diets. Weight loss inversely regulates circulating pro-NT suggesting
an intrinsic physiological phenomenon that possibly reflects the central regulation
of the weight maintenance.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC12.3
OC12.4
GLP-1 directed delivery of dexamethasone ameliorates hypothalamic
inflammation and reverses diet-induced obesity
Carmelo Quarta1, Christoffer Clemmensen1, Bin Yang2, Zhimeng Zhu2,
Timo D Muller1, Richard D DiMarchi2, Brian Finan2 & Matthias H Tschop1
1Helmholtz Diabetes Center, Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen, Division of
Metabolic Diseases, Technische Universitat Munchen, 80333 Munich,
Germany;2Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington,
Indiana, USA.
Abstract
Inflammation plays a contributing role in the pathogenesis of several metabolic
disorders, including type 2 diabetes and obesity. Intriguingly, obesogenic diets
induce markers of hypothalamic inflammation and neuronal injury in both rodents
and humans, suggesting that targeting inflammatory pathways in the hypo-
thalamus  might  represent  a  novel  strategy  to  control  energy  metabolism.
Unfortunately, the majority of steroid-based anti-inflammatory drugs are fraught
with adverse off-target effects that restrict their use for the chronic treatment of
metabolic diseases. We developed a new series of peptide/nuclear hormone
conjugates with the aim to selectively deliver anti-inflammatory signals to tissues
entwined in metabolic inflammation, including the hypothalamus. Our data show
that GLP-1/dexamethasone conjugates allow selective delivery of dexamethasone
to tissues expressing GLP-1 receptors. This pharmacological approach reduces
markers of inflammation in the hypothalamus in a body weight-independent
manner; it restores energy metabolic signalling and drives weight loss in diet-
induced obese mice. Such positive metabolic effects are greater than those
observed with equivalent GLP-1 or dexamethasone treatment alone. Intriguingly,
mice bearing a genetic deletion of GLP-1R in the central nervous system, were
only partially responsive to the compound-induced effects on energy metabolism,
indicating that central delivery of anti-inflammatory signals is required for the
positive metabolic effects of GLP-1/dexamethasone conjugates.
The GLP-1/dexamethasone conjugate does not induce glucocorticoid signalling
in GLP-1R negative tissues and further, classical hallmark drawbacks associated
with  chronic  dexamethasone  treatment  are  circumvented  with  the  peptide-
medicated delivery approach, including: (i) muscle wasting, (ii) negative impact
on bone turnover, and (iii) the diabetogenic liability of hepatic glucocorticoid
action.
These preclinical studies imply that selective delivery of dexamethasone to GLP-
1R expressing cells hold promise to safely treat metabolic inflammation and
obesity, possibly by reversing inflammatory like processes in the hypothalamus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC12.4
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
OC12.5
GNB3 overexpression causes obesity and metabolic syndrome
Alev Cagla Ozdemir, Grace M Wynn & M Katharine Rudd
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
Duplication of the guanine nucleotide-binding protein beta subunit 3 (GNB3)
gene is associated with early-onset obesity in individuals with an unbalanced
chromosome  translocation.  Additionally,  a  cytosine  to  thymine
(C825T)
polymorphism in GNB3 is associated with hypertension, obesity and metabolic
syndrome; however, the mechanism of GNB3-related obesity is unknown. We
created BAC-transgenic mice that carry an extra copy of the human risk-allele (T)
of GNB3.
Heterozygous mice express transgenic GNB3 in whole brain, hypothalamus,
olfactory bulb, and cerebellum at levels significantly greater than endogenous
Gnb3.
These GNB3-T mice weigh significantly more than their wild-type littermates
starting at age 6-7 weeks (PZ0.002). At 20 weeks, GNB3-T mice have increased
adiposity, indicated by greater subcutaneous and visceral white adipose tissue
(WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT) depots, larger white adipocytes, and
larger livers compared to wild-types. Lean mass is approximately the same in
GNB3-T and wild-type mice, suggesting that the difference in weight is strictly
due to an increase in fat mass. GNB3-T mice have similar food intake and activity
levels compared to wild-types. Fasting plasma ghrelin and PYY levels are similar
to wild-types, while amylin is elevated in GNB3-T mice at 20 weeks, indicating
proper satiety. GNB3-T mice have glucose intolerance and elevated fasting
plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide, consistent with type 2 diabetes. GNB3-T mice
also  have  higher  fasting  plasma  leptin,  triglycerides,  total  cholesterol  and
phospholipids compared to wild-types. Volume oxygen consumed, heat produced
and respiratory exchange ratio are not significantly different in GNB3-T mice and
wild-types. GNB3-T mice have difficulty maintaining core body temperature
during acute cold stress compared to wild-types. Citrate synthase activity in
subcutaneous WAT and BAT depots is not different in GNB3-T and wild-types.
GNB3-T  mice  have  lower  Ucp1  expression  in  subcutaneous  WAT.  Taken
together, these data support a role for GNB3 overexpression in obesity and
metabolic syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC12.5
Pituitary Clinical
OC13.1
Acromegaly is associated with increased cancer risk: a nationwide
survey in Italy on behalf of the Italian study group of acromegaly
Giuseppe Reimondo1, Massimo Terzolo1, Paola Berchialla2,
3
Elena Malchiodi3 & Maura Arosio
1Internal Medicine, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences -
A.O.U. San Luigi Gonzaga, Orbassano, Italy;2Statistical Unit, Department
of Clinical and Biological Sciences - A.O.U. San Luigi Gonzaga,
Orbassano, Italy;3Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
University of Milan, Unit of Endocrine Diseases and Diabetology,
S. Giuseppe Hospital Multimedica, Milano, Italy.
Introduction
That acromegaly may cause cancer remains an unsolved issue. Aim of the present
study was to assess the standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) of different types of
cancer in a nationwide multicenter cohort study in Italy on acromegalic patients
who have been treated in the somatostatin-receptor ligands era.
Methods and design
We have evaluated the prevalence of neoplasia from a series of 1512 patients who
were proactively followed in 24 tertiary referral centers in Italy. They were 624
(41.2%) men (median age at diagnosis 42 years) and 888 (58.8%) women (median
age at diagnosis 47 years). Cancer registrations were coded using the ICD-9, and
data were compared to the general Italian population using the cancer registry
AIRTUM.
Results
SIR for all cancers was increased compared to the general Italian population
(1.41;
95%CI,  1.18-1.68,  P!0.001).  In  female  patients,  incidence  of  all
malignancies was increased (SIR 1.51; 95% CI, 1.20-1.91, P!0.001), as was
incidence of thyroid cancer, colorectal cancer, and breast cancer. In male patients,
incidence of all malignancies was increased (SIR 1.29; 95% CI, 0.99-1.7), as was
incidence of thyroid cancer, kidney cancer, and colorectal cancer. In multi-
variable analysis, factors significantly associated with an increased risk of cancer
were age and family history of cancer.
Conclusions
We found evidence that acromegaly is associated with a moderate increase in
cancer risk. This may explain why previous underpowered studies failed to
demonstrate it. Much of the risk is attributable to thyroid and colon cancer in both
genders, breast cancer in women, and kidney cancer in men.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC13.1
OC13.2
Growth hormone and insulin signalling after acute GH exposure in
patients with controlled acromegaly: impact of surgery versus
somatostatin analog treatment
Jakob Dal, Katrine Lundby Høyer, Steen B Pedersen, Nils Magnusson,
Peter Bjerrring, Jan Frystyk, Niels Møller, Niels Jessen & Jens Otto
L Jorgensen
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
Background
Somatostatin analogue treatment (SA) is used in acromegaly to suppress GH
secretion and tumour growth. In addition, SA also suppresses insulin secretion
and may impact on GH signalling in peripheral tissues.
Objective
To compare GH and insulin signalling in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue
in vivo before and after a single exogenous GH bolus in patients with acromegaly
controlled by either surgery alone or by ongoing treatment with a slow-release
SA.
Design
Eighteen patients considered controlled by either surgery alone (nZ9) or SA
treatment (nZ9) were studied for 3 h after an overnight fast (tZK60 min to tZ
120 min) with frequent blood sampling. A GH bolus was administered at tZ0 min
and muscle and fat biopsies were obtained at tZ0 min and at tZ30 min (muscle)
and at tZ120 min (fat). Interstitial fluid was obtained from skin suction blisters at
tZ0 min.
Methods
GH and IGF-I measurements in serum and interstitial fluid. Insulin and FFA
levels measured in serum. Targets of GH and insulin signalling measured in
muscle and fat by quantitative RT-PCR and western blotting.
Results
The two groups were comparable as regards GH and IGF-I levels. However, SA
treated patients exhibited higher circulating levels of free fatty acids (PZ0.04)
and glucose (PZ0.02). The SA treated group exhibited increased basal SOCS1
mRNA expression in adipose tissue. A distinct activation of GH signalling
(STAT5 phosphorylation) in skeletal muscle was detected after GH exposure in
both groups (P!0.01), which was accompanied by increased expression of SOCS
and CISH genes. A significant GH-induced phosphorylation of muscle AKT was
only observed in SA treated patients. In both groups the gene expression of PTEN,
a negative regulator of insulin signalling, increased significantly in fat after GH
exposure.
Conclusion
1) Certain metabolic and biological signatures of GH and insulin signalling differ
between acomegalic patients controlled by either surgery alone or SA treatment,
2) SA treatment unmasks an acute stimulatory effect of GH on AKT signalling
in vivo, 3) These differences may be secondary to SA-induced insulin suppression
of insulin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC13.2
OC13.3
Increased glucocorticoid replacement doses are associated with excess
mortality in patients with non-functioning pituitary adenoma
Casper Hammarstrand1, Tobias Hallén2, Eva Andersson3,
Thomas Skoglund2, Anna G Nilsson1, Oskar Ragnarsson1,
Gudmundur Johannsson1 & Daniel S Olsson1
1Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, Gothen-
burg, Sweden;2Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Department of Neurosur-
gery, Gothenburg, Sweden;3Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Department
of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Background
Patients with secondary adrenal insufficiency have an excess mortality. Data
concerning the influence of the glucocorticoid replacement regime on mortality is
sparse.
Objective
To investigate if the total daily dose of glucocorticoid replacement has an effect
on mortality in patients with non-functioning pituitary adenoma (NFPA).
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Method
Patients with NFPA treated for hypopituitarism in the western region of Sweden
were retrospectively analysed. Patients were cross-referenced with the Swedish
National Death Registry. Cox-regression analyses with 95% confidence intervals
(CI) were used to identify predictors for mortality. Patients were sub-grouped
depending  on  their  total  daily  dose  of  hydrocortisone
(HC)  equivalents
(156 patients with %20 mg HC; 50 patients with O20 mg HC). HC was used
by 198 patients (96%) at last follow-up.
Results
A total of 405 patients (264 men, 141 women) with NFPA were identified. Mean
(GSD) age at diagnosis was 58G15 years and mean follow-up time was 11G9
years. Treatment with radiotherapy was used in 75 patients (19%). Death occurred
in 76 patients (51 patients with glucocorticoid replacement). Secondary adrenal
insufficiency was found in 206 patients (151 men, 55 women), which received a
mean  daily  HC  equivalents  dose  of
21G8  mg.  A  cox-regression  of  the
glucocorticoid replacement patients showed that age (Hazard ratio (HR) 1.14;
95%  CI  1.10-1.19),  diabetes  insipidus
(3.18;
1.50-6.74)  and  a  daily  HC
equivalents dose of O20 mg (2.07; 1.13-3.77) had a negative effect on mortality,
whereas body weight (0.99; 0.97-1.01) and treatment with radiotherapy (1.00;
0.45-2.22) did not. The HR for male gender was 1.75 (95% CI 0.83-3.68).
Conclusion
Daily HC replacement doses of more than 20 mg per day and the presence of
diabetes insipidus are associated with increased mortality risk in patients with
NFPA and secondary adrenal insufficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC13.3
OC13.4
Diagnosis and management of thyrotropin-secreting pituitary tumors:
a single center experience with a long-term follow-up of 30 patients
Oana-Maria Capraru1, Celine Gaillard2, Alexandre Vasiljevic3,
Veronique Raverot4, Françoise Borson-Chazot5, Emmanuel Jouanneau6 &
Gerald Raverot5
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Physiology, Targu
Mures, Targu Mures, Romania;2Service d’Endocrinologie, Groupement
Hospitalier Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France;3Service
d’Anatomopathologie, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de
Lyon, Lyon, France;4Centre de Biologie, Groupement Hospitalier Est,
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France;5Federation d’Endocrinologie,
Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France;
6Service de Neurochirurgie, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de
Lyon, Lyon, France.
TSH secreting pituitary adenomas are rare tumours for which the treatment of
choice is neurosurgery but in some cases medical treatment with somatostatin
analogs (SSA) can lead to a good control of symptoms and shrinkage of the
tumour.
The objective of this study was to review 30 patients diagnosed with TSH-omas
between October 1981-July 2014, followed-up for a median of 43.93 months
(1.12-192.11) in our University Hospital from Lyon, France.
The median age was 49 years, 73% of the patients were females. Fourteen patients
presented signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, nine presented signs of a
pituitary tumour. Before diagnosis, 2 patients undergone thyroidectomy and one
received radioactive iodine. The median delay until positive diagnosis of TSH-
oma was 18 months (2-264). Biochemical hyperthyroidism was found in 22
patients, alpha subunit was above upper normal limit in 77.7% of patients, nine
patients  presented  hyperprolactinemia  and
3
were  also  diagnosed  with
acromegaly. In 80% of cases, the tumours were macroadenomas with a median
diameter of 13.2 mm. Fourteen adenomas had suprasellar extension, cavernous
sinus invasion was present in 26.6% (nZ8) of cases and 13.3% (nZ4) of cases
presented with sphenoid sinus invasion.
Ten patients were treated with SSA that lead to adequate control of the disease in
4 cases. In other six patients, SSA therapy was followed by surgery after
achieving euthyroidism (nZ3) or because of side effects (nZ3). After a median
follow-up of 45.63 months (2.3-190.82) after surgery of 26 patients, 78.9%
(nZ15) were in complete remission, 3 with macroadenomas had persistent
disease controlled by medical treatment (SSA or SSA and GHRA) and one patient
with a macroadenoma was controlled after pituitary radiotherapy and SSA while 7
patients were lost during follow-up.
In conclusion, neurosurgery should be first line therapy for microadenomas, while
SSA treatment could be used for invasive macroadenomas.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC13.4
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
OC13.5
Unmet health and information needs of women with hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism
Andrew Dwyer1,2, Richard Quinton3, Diane Morin1 & Nelly Pitteloud2,4
1University of Lausanne, Institute of Nursing Research, Lausanne,
Switzerland;2Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV) Endo-
crinology, Diabetes & Metabolism Service, Lausanne, Switzerland;3Royal
Victoria Infirmary and the Institute for Human Genetics, University of
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK;4University of
Lausanne, Faculty of Biology & Medicine, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Background
Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) is a rare disorder (1:40 000-
100000) characterized by absent puberty and infertility. There is striking gender
discordance (3-4 males for each female case) thus women with CHH are the
“rarest of the rare”. Unlike many orphan conditions, treatments are available and
hormonal therapies are effective for inducing puberty and fertility. However, the
presumable availability of treatment does not necessarily ensure quality of life.
Therefore, we aimed to better understand the healthcare experiences and unmet
needs of women with CHH to develop more patient-centered approaches to care.
Methods
We utilized a community-based participatory research approach to engage patient
community leaders and develop an online survey. We then leveraged patient
social media sites to reach these dispersed women. Demographics, medical
history, and information on healthcare interactions were collected and patients
completed three validated questionnaires to assess the relationship between
illness perceptions, depressive symptoms and adherence to treatment. Descriptive
statistics and comparisons to reference populations were conducted.
Results
In total, 55 women completed the survey (18-68 years, mean 35G10, median 34).
Women were more likely to have been in a relationship compared to their male
(nZ101) counterparts (P!0.05). Roughly 1/3 of CHH patients had received
fertility treatment yet women were more likely to have biologic children (80% vs.
28%, P!0.01). Notably, both sexes struggled with adherence to treatment and
shared similar negative illness perceptions. Compared to community base rates,
women with CHH have increased levels of moderate (9/55, 16%) and severe
depressive symptoms (7/15, 13%).
Conclusions
Despite available treatment and successful fertility outcomes, patients with CHH
report significant physical, psychological and social consequences as a result of
their  condition.  They  often  struggle  with  adherence  and  exhibit  increased
depressive  symptoms  which  negatively  impact  quality  of  life.  These  data
underscore the importance of attending to the psychological needs of patients in
addition to adequate hormonal therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC13.5
Thyroid Cancer
OC14.1
Tumor and normal thyroid stem-like cells: from tissues to zebrafish
Valentina Cirello1, Valentina Vaira2, Germano Gaudenzi3,4, Elisa Stellaria
Grassi3, Giovanni Vitale3,4, Dario Ricca2, Silvano Bosari1,2,
Leonardo Vicentini5, Luca Persani3,4, Stefano Ferrero2,6 &
Laura Fugazzola1,7
1Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy;2Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda,
Milan, Italy;3Division of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases & Lab of
Endocrine and Metabolic Research, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS,
Milan, Italy;4Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy;5Endocrine Surgery Unit, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Milan; Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental
Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy;6Department of Biomedical,
Surgical and Dental Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy;7Endocrine
Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Milan, Italy.
Introduction
Cells with stem-like properties have been reported in benign and malignant
thyroid diseases, and can be propagated by culturing them as non-adherent
spheres.
Design
Aim of the present study was to widely characterize the stem-like cells in tumor
and normal thyroid tissues and in the corresponding in vitro-cultured thyro-
spheres, and to investigate in vivo the proangiogenic potential of thyrospheres in a
zebrafish model.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Result
Among the stemness markers tested, POU5F1/OCT4 has the highest expression in
both tumor tissues and thyrospheres. POU5F1/OCT4 is expressed in the core of
tumor thyrospheres, whereas TG and TTF1 differentiation markers are expressed
at the periphery, indicating a progressive differentiative process from the center to
the  border  of  the  spheres.  Endothelial  markers
(CD34  and  CD31)  are
co-expressed in both tumor and normal spheres, mimicking the formation of
vascular structures, consistent with the pluripotency of the spheres cells which are
able to directly contribute to their own vasculature. Finally, we show that the
injection of either tumor or normal thyrospheres into the subepidermal space of
zebrafish embryos stimulates the migration and growth of sprouting vessels
toward the implant.
Conclusion
We  widely  characterized  stem-like  cells  in  thyroid  tissues  and  in  the
corresponding  thyrospheres,  and  established  xenografts  in  zebrafish.  These
in vitro and in vivo models are expected to become a valuable platform to test the
effects of novel compounds on stem-like cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC14.1
OC14.2
Complex immunometabolic pathways mediate the interaction between
thyroid carcinoma cells and tumor-associated macrophages
Rob Arts1, Theo Plantinga2, Bas Heinhuis1, Sander Tuit4, Mirela Petrulea3,
Marika Tesselaar2, Yvette Sloot1, Benno Kusters2, Leo Joosten1,
Carmen Georgescu3, Johannes Smit1, Mihai Netea1, Joakim Schulze4 &
Romana Netea-Maier1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands;2Department of Pathology, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands;3Department of
Endocrinology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania;4Genomics and Immunoregulation, LIMES,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Romania.
Background
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) with dysregulated inflammatory pheno-
types play a key role in carcinogenesis. In thyroid carcinoma (TC), excessive
release of proinflammatory cytokines decreases the expression of sodium-iodine
transporter and inflammation potentiates tumor progression.
Aim
To assess the impact of TC cells on the functional reprograming of TC-induced
macrophages at the level of transcriptome and metabolic pathways, and assess
their influence on the proinflammatory phenotype of TAMs.
Methods
TC cell lines TPC1, BC-PAP and FTC133 were co-incubated with human
monocytes in a trans-well system. Release of cytokines and transcriptomics
profiles of the immune cells and of the TC cell lines were investigated. The
metabolic reprogramming was validated by metabolite assessment, perturbation
experiments, and immunohistochemical (IHC) assessment of metabolic enzymes
in TAMs in TC tissue samples.
Results
Co-incubation of TC cells with monocytes and stimulation of monocytes with
TC-conditioned medium resulted in differentiation of TC-induced macrophages
with  a  strong  proinflammatory  profile  producing
3-  to
5-fold  more  proin-
flammatory  cytokines
(TNF,  IL-6)  and  chemokines
(IL-8)  than  control
macrophages. Metabolite assessment and perturbation experiments revealed a
central role for lactate-mediated effects. Transcriptome profiling of TC-induced
macrophages identified strongly upregulated metabolic pathways e.g. glycolysis.
This  was  confirmed  by  IHC  staining  of  glycolytic  enzymes  and  receptors
(PFKFB3, PKM2, lactate receptor) in TAMs in TC tissue and by an increased
maximal extracellular acidification rate of TC-induced macrophages. Inhibition
of mTOR reversed the upregulation of cytokine production which was partially
dependent on epigenetic histone modifications (H3K4me3) at the promoter sites
of IL6 and TNFa.To support the role of mTOR pathway we investigated SNPs in
PI3K, Akt, and mTOR in two separate cohorts of TC patients. Akt1 SNP
rs3803304, resulting in increased phosphorylation of Akt, was more prevalent in
TC patients.
Conclusion
Transcriptional  regulatory  nodes  involving metabolic  pathways e.g.  aerobic
glycolysis regulate the interplay between TC cells and TAM, resulting in a
microenvironment with a strong inflammatory profile. These pathways represent
potential therapeutic targets in TC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC14.2
OC14.3
Tert and the oxidative stress in papillary thyroid cancer
Marina Muzza1,2, Carla Colombo1,2, Valentina Cirello1,3,
Michela Perrino1,2, Leonardo Vicentini4 & Laura Fugazzola1,3
1Endocrine Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Milan, Italy;2Department
of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy;3Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy;4Endocrine Surgery Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’
Granda, Milan, Italy.
Abstract
During hormonogenesis, thyroid cells are physiologically exposed to high levels
of  reactive  oxygen  species
(ROS)  which  could  either  be  involved  in  the
pathogenesis of thyroid cancer or exert a cytotoxic effect. We analyzed the
oxidative status of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) either directly, by measuring
H2O2 generation by NADPH oxidases (NOXs), and indirectly, by evaluating the
antioxidant activity of glutathione peroxidase (GPX), which neutralizes H2O2
excess, and lipid peroxidation (LP). Moreover, since TERT exhibits a stress
protection activity upon its translocation to the mitochondria, we investigated its
subcellular localization in PTC.
A significantly  higher calcium-dependent and independent H2O2
generation
activity was found in tumors with respect  to normal tissues.  Interestingly,
BRAF/RAS mutated tumors had a H2O2 production higher than wild-type tumors,
and a trend towards a higher H2O2 generation activity was found in tumors from
females compared to males. The GPX activity was found to be higher in PTCs
with respect to normal tissues, and was significantly increased in tumors from
young  than  from  older  patients,  while  no  differences  were  found  in  lipid
peroxidation. GPX activity. Moreover, we demonstrated for the first time the
mitochondrial localization of TERT in PTC, suggesting that the elevated ROS
levels associated with TC could be responsible for the shuttling of TERT from the
nucleus to the mitochondria.
In conclusion, present data demonstrate that PTCs are exposed to elevated ROS,
with a potential cytotoxic effect. Nevertheless, the increase of GPX activity and
the mitochondrial localization of TERT seem to be able to compensate the
damage derived from the excessive ROS exposure, supporting the neoplastic
process.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC14.3
OC14.4
Prognostic value of microscopic extrathyroid extension in papillary
thyroid carcinoma
Bernardo Marques, Raquel Martins, Joana Couto, Jacinta Santos,
Teresa Martins, Pedro Mesquita, Patrícia Gilde, Ivan Portela,
Eugénia Rovira, Sofia Oliveira, Carlos Cruz, João Neto &
Fernando Rodrigues
Portuguese Institute of Oncology of Coimbra FG, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Although recognized as a risk factor in most staging systems, including the UICC
TNM classification, the significance of microscopic extrathyroid extension (ETE)
in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) remains controversial. Despite this fact, its
diagnosis by a pathologist following surgery for tumours % 4 cm without
metastases means an upstaging to pT3 and stage III in patients over 45 years,
implying  a  poorer  survival.  Our  study  aimed  to  evaluate  the  impact  of
microscopic ETE on outcome in patients with otherwise T1 and T2 PTC.
Methods/design
This was a retrospective study of 603 consecutive patients identified from our
institutional database, who underwent surgery for PTC between 2000 and 2012.
All patients had: tumours % 4 cm, apparent complete tumor resection, without
clinically  apparent  lymph  node  or  distant  metastasis  at  diagnosis  and
nonaggressive histologic variant. The association between variables was assessed
using chi-square and Student’s t-tests.
Results
All patients were followed for a minimum of 3 years postoperatively (76.7G48.7
months). Ninety four (15.6%) patients were upstaged to T3 based on the finding of
microscopic ETE.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
These patients were older (54.3G12.4 versus 49.9G14.2 years; PZ0.005) and
had larger tumours (15.9G9.3 versus 13.5G9.7 mm; PZ0.0025). Radioiodine
ablation therapy was administered more often to T3 patients (97.7% versus
40.2%; P!0.001), as well as prophylactic lymph node resection (37.6% versus
25.6%; PZ0.017). There were no significant associations between microscopic
ETE and extension of thyroid surgery (total thyroidectomy was performed in
94.9% of T1/T2 patients versus 97.9% of T3 patients; PZ0.288), in recurrence
rate (3.8% versus 6.7%; PZ0.245) or persistence of disease at the end of the
follow-up period (1.7% versus 4.4%; PZ0.106). No disease-specific mortality
occurred in either group.
Conclusion
Our results suggest that upstaging of T1/T2 PTC because of microscopic ETE
may not have an impact on patients’ outcomes, namely recurrence, persistence of
disease and mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC14.4
OC14.5
Clinical presentation, treatment and outcome of anaplastic thyroid
carcinoma in Germany: a retrospective multi-center study
Julia Wendler1, Matthias Kroiss1,6, Katja Gast3, Michael Kreissl7,
Stephanie Allelein2, Urs Lichtenauer3, Rainer Blaser4, Klaus Kuhn4,
Christine Spitzweg3, Martin Fassnacht1, Dagmar Fuhrer5, Matthias Schott2
& Vera Tiedje5
1University Hospital Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany;2University Hospital
Dusseldorf, Dusseldorf, Germany;3Klinikum der Universitat Munchen,
Munchen, Germany;4Technical University Munchen, Munchen, Germany;
5University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany;6Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Wurzburg, Germany;7Central Hospital, Augsburg, Germany.
Context
Anaplastic (ATC) thyroid carcinoma is an orphan disease accounting for about
2% of all malignant thyroid tumors. ATC confers a dismal prognosis and standard
treatment is not established.
Objective
To describe the epidemiology, current treatment regimens and outcome of ATC,
to identify clinical prognostic markers and treatment factors associated with
improved prognosis. To establish a consensus treatment schedule.
Design
Retrospective multicenter study.
Setting
6 German tertiary referral centers.
Patients
100 ATC patients diagnosed 2000 -2015
Main outcome measure
Disease specific overall survival (OS).
Results
Tumor stage was IVA in 9, IVB in 32 and IVC in 54 patients (unknown: 5). The
1-month, 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year disease specific OS rates were 37%, 28%,
18%, and 5%, respectively. Stage dependent OS at 6 months was 78%, 54% and
18% for stage IVA, B and C respectively. 29 patients survived O1 year.
Multivariate analysis of OS using Cox proportional hazard regression identified
age R70 years, incomplete local resection status and the presence of distant
metastasis as significant risk factors for shorter survival. Radical surgery (hazard
ratio
[HR] 2.201, 95% confidence interval 1.186-4.086, PZ0.012), external
beam radiation (EBRT) R40 Gy (HR 0.339, 95%-CI 0.152-0.759, PZ0.008)
and any kind of chemotherapy (CTX) (HR 11.636, 95%-CI 2.424-60.394,
PZ0.003) were associated with longer survival in multivariate analyses adjusted
for age and tumor stage. A multimodal treatment regimen applied in 49/100
patients was associated with a marginal survival benefit (HR 1.040, 1.007-1.075,
P!0.0001) only in IVC patients (nZ25).
Conclusion
Disease specific OS is still poor in ATC. Treatment factors associated with longer
survival were identified. These were taken into account to develop a consensus
treatment schedule for multimodal management of ATC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.OC14.5
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Guided Posters
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Adrenal
GP1
The role of primary cilia in the molecular pathogenesis of
phaeochromocytoma
Samuel O’Toole1,2, Umasuthan Srirangalingam1,2, William Drake1,2 &
J Paul Chapple1
1Queen Mary University of London, London, UK;2St Bartholomews
Hospital, London, UK.
Phaeochromocytomas are neuroendocrine tumours arising from adrenal medulla
chromaffin cells. They are life threatening due to adrenaline and noradrenaline
release and potential for metastatic spread. Understanding of phaeochromocy-
toma  pathogenesis  is  incomplete  with  limited  ability  to  predict  malignant
potential. Additionally, once metastatic, response to conventional therapies is
disappointing.
Phaeochromocytomas are a common feature of the inherited cancer syndrome
von Hippel-Lindau disease, which is caused by loss of function of the VHL
protein. As well as its canonical function in degradation of the transcription factor
hypoxia-inducible factor, VHL is implicated in formation and maintenance of
primary cilia. These are microtubule-based organelles that protrude from the
cells, functioning in transduction of extracellular signals. This is dependent on
localisation  of  signalling  components  to  cilia,  including  proteins  linked  to
pathways that are dysregulated in tumorigenesis. Moreover, cilia are believed to
act as a checkpoint for cell division, because they assemble from the basal body,
which is a modified centriole and thus required for spindle pole formation at the
end of interphase.
In this study we tested the hypothesis that primary cilia structure is disrupted in
phaeochromocytomas, observing that incidence and length of primary cilia was
reduced  in  sporadic  and  inherited  phaeochromocytomas  relative  to  normal
adjacent  tissue.  This  was  also  the  case  in  primary  cells  cultured  from
phaeochromocytomas. Using the phaeochromocytoma derived PC12 cell line
we showed that abrogation of cilia, through knockdown of the ciliary protein
IFT88, correlated with an increased rate of cell division (quantified by Ki67
staining). We then investigated if features of the tumour microenvironment
impact on ciliary function. These studies revealed that hypoxic conditions and
succinate dehydrogenase inhibition result in disrupted cilia structure in the
context of phaeochromocytoma.
Our data indicate primary cilia dysfunction is a feature of phaeochromocytomas,
potentially contributing to pathogenesis and representing a target for therapeutic
intervention.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP1
GP2
Screening for a ten-gene panel in a group of 90 phaeochromocytomas
Emilia Sbardella1,4, Treena Cranston2, Radu Mihai3 & Ashley Grossman1
1Department of Endocrinology, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Trust, Oxford, UK;2Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Churchill
Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, UK;
3Department of Surgery, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals
NHS Trust, Oxford, UK;4Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
Background
Several new gene mutations have been reported in recent years to be associated
with a risk of familial phaeochromocytomas (PHAEOs). However, it is unclear as
to whether extensive genetic testing is required in all patients (pts).
Methods
Clinical data of consecutive patients operated for PHAEO over a decade in a
tertiary referral centre were reviewed. Genetic screening was performed using a
ten-gene panel: RET, VHL, SDHB, SDHD, SDHA, SDHC, SDHAF2, MAX,
TMEM127, (NF1 when indicated; TMEM127 and SDHB if O 45 years and
isolated PHAEO).
Results
A total of 157 patients (68 M: 43.3%, 89 F: 56.7%, age range 6-86 years, median
50.3G17.4 years) underwent laparoscopic (85%), open (10.5%), or laparoscopic
converted to open (4.5%) adrenalectomy for unilateral (92%) or bilateral (8%)
adrenal PHAEOs: 90 pts underwent genetic screening, in particular 60/90 (66.7%)
pts presented with apparently sporadic tumours and 30/90 (33.3%) pts had genetic
mutations. These were more frequently seen with bilateral PHAEOs (PZ0.02).
Mutations were seen in 12.2% pts for VHL, 10% NF1, 5.6% MEN2, 1.1% MEN3,
2.2% SDHD and 2.2% MAX. During a median follow-up of 50.4 months, 8%
showed  recurrent  and
7%  had  metastatic  disease.  Younger  pts  showed  a
significant higher percentage of mutations compared to older pts (44% vs 17%).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Twenty-seven percent of mutations were identified in pts with unilateral-non-
recurrent PHAEOs within 5 years vs 62.5% in the recurrent-bilateral-metastatic
group. Eighty-six of pts with bilateral disease had germline mutations (2 VHL,
2 RET, 1 NF1, 1 MAX).
Conclusions
The advent of rapid genetic screening for a ten-gene panel makes it feasible to
screen large cohorts of pts, and allows for the prediction of bilateral and malignant
disease and the screening of family members.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP2
GP3
Follow-up of adrenal incidentalomas - are we overdoing it? Follow-up
of 145 patients from a single centre
Emily Austin, Ben Miller, Lisa Shepherd & Andrew Bates
Heartlands Hospital, Heart of England Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
Background
Current practice of monitoring adrenal incidentalomas with biochemical follow-
up and repeat imaging studies is under review by the ESE.
Following an audit presented in 2015, we proposed that this extensive follow-up
was unnecessary in radiologically benign lesions, as neither functional nor
malignant lesions were present in this subgroup.
Methods
A retrospective  review  of  the  same  cohort  of
145
patients  with  adrenal
incidentalomas (January 2013 - January 2015), evaluated the outcome of repeat
imaging and biochemistry.
Functionality was  determined  by  overnight  dexamethasone  suppression  test
(cortisol O140 defines autonomous cortisol secretion), renin: aldosterone, serum
DHEAS and 24 h urinary metanephrines.
Results
Eighty-five percent were non-functional adenomas, 6% were benign lesions (e.g.
angiomyolipomas). 0.7% had Conn’s adenoma with raised renin:aldosterone. No
patients had autonomous cortisol secretion. 4% were phaeochromocytomas - all
were suspected on imaging and had raised urinary metanephrines; one had
elevated DHEAS in addition. 4% were malignant lesions - 1.4% adrenocortical
carcinomas (ACC), 2.1% metastases and 0.7% sarcoma.
Forty-eight percent of images were typical of benign adenomas, of which 70%
had repeat imaging at an average time interval of 18 months - none changed.
45.5% of scans were indeterminate, however on further imaging 80% were
considered benign adenomas with no change over an average time interval of 13
months. 3.5% of scans appeared malignant, of which 60% were phaeochromo-
cytomas and 20% ACCs. The remainder were non-adrenal. 3% of scans were
angiomyolipomas.
Mean duration from detection scan to most recent biochemical testing was
9 months, during which, 91% of incidentalomas remained non-functional. 23% of
the cohort had repeat biochemistry; none progressed from non-functional to
functional lesions.
Conclusion
We maintain that, follow-up is unnecessary for adrenal incidentalomas that are
consistent  with  benign  adenomas  on  initial  imaging,  and  non-functional.
Transformation to malignant or functional lesions is rare.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP3
GP4
The role of immunochemistry in the SDHx mutations in
pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas
Anna Angelousi1, Kyriakopoulos Georgios2, Constantinou Pavlos2,
Zografos Georgios3, Piaditis Georgios3, Xoreutaki Theodosia3,
Rontogianni Dimitra2 & Kaltsas Gregory1
1Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece;2Evangelismos
Hospital, Athens, Greece;3Gennimatas Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Early detection of succinate dehydrogenase complex (SDH) mutations in patients
with pheochromocytoma and paragaglioma (PPC/PGL) has important impli-
cations as it is associated with increased risk for malignancy. The use of negative
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for SDH subunit B, D, A (SDHB/-D/-A) has
been proposed as an indicator of SDHs mutation and as an effective substitute for
the high-cost genetic screening of all of these genes.
Methods
We have performed SDHB/-D/-A immunohistochemical staining in a series of 27
paraffin embedded PPCs/PGLs specimens. Screening for point mutations by
direct Sanger sequencing was performed in germline DNA from patients with
potential aggressive (PASSO6) or metastatic PPCs at the initial diagnosis or in
cases of PGLs.
Results
Twenty-five cases with PPCs and two with PGLs were enrolled (16 females).
Three cases were metastatic at diagnosis whereas one developed metastases
during follow up. Ten cases (40%) had a PASS O6. Genetic testing for germline
analysis had previously been performed in 18 cases and positive results were
found in six (one case was found posit if for SDHB mutation, one for familial
SDHD, two for RET, one for NF1 and one for VHL mutation). The patient with
the SDHB germinal mutation exhibited negative SDHB and positive SDHD/-A
staining  pattern.  The  patient  with  the  SDHD  germinal  mutation  exhibited
negative SDHB/-D and positive SDHA staining pattern. Cases with RET, NF1
and VHL germline mutation as well as those wihout any mutations exhibited
positive SDHB/-A and negative SDHD immunostaining.
Discussion
Our results are in agreement with previous series which have shown that SDHB/
-D/-A immunohistochemical analysis could be a low cost technique to predict the
presence of SDHx mutations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP4
GP5
Improvement of bone turnover markers and bone mineral density
following treatment of primary aldosteronism
Huai Heng Loh1, Nor Azmi Kamaruddin2 & Norlela Sukor2
1Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia;2Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Center, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Context
Recent studies showed association between hyperaldosteronism and low bone
density among patients with primary  aldosteronism
(PA) due to secondary
hyperparathyroidism.
Objective
To assess bone turnover markers and bone mineral density (BMD) of PA patients
compared to essential hypertension.
Design
This was an open label, prospective, case-controlled study, conducted over
12 months.
Setting
Eighteen consecutive out-patients with confirmed PA and seventeen age- and sex-
matched controls were recruited.
Patients
All patients had confirmed PA based on Endocrine Society guideline. Controls
were patients with essential hypertension.
Intervention
Bone turnover markers (CTX and P1NP), BMD, intact parathyroid hormone
(iPTH), and bone profile were assessed at baseline and three months following
treatment among 15 PA patients. Calcium intake was assessed using a validated
questionnaire.
Main outcome measures
Primary  outcomes  were  the  changes  of  bone  turnover  markers  and  BMD
following treatment of PA, and their relation to other parameters.
Results
PA patients had significantly lower serum calcium and higher iPTH despite
comparable vitamin D levels with control group. Both bone turnover markers
were significantly higher among the PA group. BMD of lumbar spine, neck of
femur and distal radius did not differ between groups. Three months following
treatment, there were significant i) increment of serum 25-OH vitamin D level,
ii)  reduction  in  iPTH  level,  iii)  reduction  in  bone  turnover  markers  and
iv) improvement in the lumbar spine BMD.
Conclusion
PA  is  a  state  of  high  bone  turnover  in  the  presence  of  secondary
hyperparathyroidism. Treatment of PA improves secondary hyperparathyroidism
with reduction in bone turnover markers.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP5
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP6
Dissociation of subtype diagnosis by various criteria on adrenal venous
samplings in primary aldosteronism
Takamasa Ichijo, Marina Harada, Akeo Ohira, Naoko Miyashita,
Momoko Kanaguchi, Kaoru Yamashita, Hiromi Ouchi & Mariko Higa
Saiseikai Yokohamashi Tobu Hospital, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
Although the primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most common endocrinological
hypertension accounted for approximately 10% of all hypertension population,
the subtype classification criteria of adrenal venous samplings (AVS) have been
still controversial. Thus, we demonstrated the several different criteria to diagnose
the unilateral hyper-aldosteronism (UHA) suspected as adenomas in our series of
patients with PA.
This study is included 213 AVS performed PA patients, diagnosed by at least one
of the following conformational tests, upright furosemide test, saline infusion test
and  captopril  challenge  test,  including  both  UHA  and  bilateral  hyper-
aldosteronism (BHA), and 184 AVS succeeded patients were analyzed. We
employed as the success criteria of catheterization as selectivity index (SI),
calculated by cortisol at each adrenal veins/inferior vena cava (IVC) O2 for
before ACTH stimulation and O5 for after. We also employed the criteria for
UHA; lateralized ratio (LR) O2 for before stimulation and O4 for the after,
calculated by the dominant side of aldosterone/cortisol ratio (A/C) divided by the
recessive side of A/C, the contralateral ratio (CR) !1 for both before and after
stimulation, calculated by recessive side of A/C divided by A/C at IVC, and the
dominant  side  of  aldosterone  at  adrenal  vein
(PAC)  O1400 ng/dl  and
%1400 ng/dl at the recessive side.
The patients background showed the average age was 56.0G12.1 years old
including 72 males and 112 females. Our result showed the prevalence diagnosed
as UHA were 58.7, 12.0, 33.7, 15.2, 40.8% for LRO2 without ACTH, LRO4
with ACTH, CR!1 without ACTH, CR!1 with ACTH, and PAC O1400 ng/dl,
respectively.
These  results  clearly demonstrated  that  subtype  diagnosis  shows  enormous
dissociation depending on the decision criteria. The dissociated results of subtype
cause profound impact in making decision for the type of therapy. The worldwide
standardization of the decision criteria of AVS is required.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP6
GP7
New germline mutation in CACNA1H calcium channel causing primary
aldosteronism
Kirsten Roomp1, Kamil Grzyb1, Cristina Wolf1, Yara Rhayem2,
Nuria Oliver5, Barbara Wardas3, Andreas Beck3, Antonio Pico6,
Felix Beuschlein2, Alexander Skupin1, Patrick May1 &
Jochen G. Schneider1,4
1Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg,
Esch, Luxembourg;2Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der
Universitat Munchen, Munich, Germany;3Department of Pharmacology,
Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany;4Department of
Internal Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg,
Germany;5Telefonica Research and Development, Barcelona, Spain;
6Hospital Universitario de Alicante, University Miguel Hernández,
Alicante, Spain.
Introduction
Primary aldosteronism (PA) occurs due to an excess production of aldosterone in
the adrenal glands, resulting in low renin levels and hypertension. Familial
hyperaldosteronism is considered to be a relatively rare disorder, with only a
small number of genes having been implicated so far. The aim of the present study
is to identify the molecular cause of disease in a PA family, as well as examining
the mechanisms in an in vitro setting.
Patients and methods
Comprehensive biochemical and clinical phenotyping, as well as genome-level
sequencing was performed in the PA family to identify the molecular cause.
HEK293T cells then were transfected with wildtype and mutant expression
plasmids to enable the production of electrophysiological recordings. To further
investigate  the  potential  physiologic  effects  of  the  mutation,  we  measured
cytosolic Ca2C dynamics by fluorescent live cell imaging in the HEK cells with
wildtype and mutanted CACNA1H.
Results
We have identified the new heterozygous germline mutation in CACNA1H
(p.G1064R) in the PA family. CACNA1H encodes a voltage-gated Ca2C channel,
which is expressed in the adrenal glomerulosa. The mutation lies in a conserved
region in the II-III intracellular linker. Electrophysiological recordings showed
no  significant  differences  between  the  wildtype  and  mutant.  However,  the
fluorescent live cell imaging experiments showed cell populations of HEK293T
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
cells transformed with the mutant variant with significant decrease in average
periods of 10s (PZ0.02), i.e. greater global spiking activity, compared to the
wildtype variant.
Conclusions
Our analysis has identified a new mutation germline in CACNA1H that confers a
decrease in average periods leading to greater spiking activity of the mutant. We
postulate that these effects cause an increase in the influx of Ca2C and that this is
the stimulus for increased aldosterone production and cellular proliferation in the
adrenal glands.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP7
GP8
Adequate salt intake attenuates mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist-
induced hyperkalemia in patients with primary aldosteronism
Stelios Fountoulakis, Labrini Papanastasiou & George Piaditis
Department of Endocrinology, General Hospital of Athens ‘G. Gennimatas’,
Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Mild  hyperkalemia  is  a  common  side-effect  of  mineralocorticoid  receptor
antagonists (MRA), which can be precipitated by minimizing dietary salt intake.
Restoration  of  salt  intake  can  overcome  diminished  kaliuresis  and  restore
potassium levels. Aim of this study was the evaluation of the effect of adequate
salt consumption on plasma potassium levels in relation to the mean, maximum
and minimum blood pressure (BP) in MRA-treated sodium-depleted hyperka-
lemic patients with primary aldosteronism (PA).
Description of methods/design
Nine MRA-treated sodium-depleted PA patients (67.7G9.7 years of age) were
recruited. BP was documented by the patients and renin (plasma), aldosterone
(plasma), potassium and sodium (plasma and 24 h urine) levels were measured
while patients were following a sodium-restricted diet and after one month of
adequate dietary salt supplementation (4 g of salt/day).
Results
Salt  supplementation
(24 h  urine  sodium:
199.39G50.46
vs
101.06G
41.78 mmol/d) increased kaliuresis
(68.9G21.7
vs
54.21G17.6 mmol/d,
P!0.001) and resulted in a statistically significant decrease of potassium
(4.64G0.34
vs
5.28G0.26 mmol/l, P!0.001), renin
(43.2G47 vs
53G
48.5 pg/ml, PZ0.004) and aldosterone (1603G1670 vs 2435G1667 pmol/l,
PZ0.015) levels, without affecting plasma sodium levels (138.4G2.65 vs 138G
2.69 mmol/l), mean diastolic or systolic BP (128.3G10.6 vs 129.2G10.2 and 71G
7.6 vs 71.1G7.5 mmHg, respectively) or minimum and maximum BP values.
Conclusion
Adequate  salt  intake  can  attenuate  MRA-induced  hyperkalemia in sodium-
depleted PA patients without short term effects on BP.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP8
GP9
Is steroid profiling using LC-MS/MS useful in the diagnostic work-up of
primary aldosteronism?
Tracy A. Williams1,2, Jacques W.M. Lenders3,4, Mirko Peitzsch5,
Tanja Dekkers3, Anna S. Dietz1, Lars C. Rump6, Holger S. Willenberg7,8,
Marcus Treitl9, Martin Bidlingmaier1, Felix Beuschlein1, Jaap Deinum3,
Graeme Eisenhofer4,5 & Martin Reincke1
1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Ludwig-Maximi-
lians-Universitat Munchen, Munich, Germany;2Division of Internal
Medicine and Hypertension, Department of Medical Sciences, University of
Turin, Turin, Italy;3Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands;4Department of
Internal Medicine III, Technische Universitat Dresden, Dresden, Germany;
5Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Technische
Universitat Dresden, Dresden, Germany;6Medical Faculty, Department of
Nephrology, University Dusseldorf, Dusseldorf, Germany;7Medical
Faculty, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism,
University Dusseldorf, Dusseldorf, Germany,8Division of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Rostock University Medical Center, Rostock, Germany;
9Klinische Radiologie, Klinikum der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat
Munchen, Munich, Germany.
Introduction
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is mainly caused by unilateral aldosterone-producing
adenomas (APA) or bilateral adrenal hyperplasia (BAH). Subtype differentiation
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
relies on the invasive and technically challenging adrenal venous sampling (AVS).
We recently demonstrated the potential utility of peripheral plasma steroid
profiling by LC-MS/MS to distinguish APA and BAH. We tested the following
hypotheses:  first,  if  steroid  profiling  in  combination  with  AVS,  effectively
identifies patients with unilateral disease who are candidates for surgery and
second, if steroid profiling identifies those patients with a high likelihood for BAH
in whom AVS may be avoided.
Methods
Two hundred and eight confirmed PA patients underwent computed tomography,
AVS and steroid profiling of peripheral plasma by LC-MS/MS. Long-term
outcome of adrenalectomy was assessed by clinical and biochemical re-evalua-
tion in all subjects. The diagnostic accuracy for subtyping PA patients was
calculated  based  on  different  strategies  for  PA  subtype  differentiation  and
compared to the gold standard of AVS.
Results
The diagnostic accuracy of AVS was 97%, with 6 out of 121 APA patients
incorrectly classified on the basis of persistent PA following adrenalectomy.
Steroid profiling correctly classified 79% of PA patients but this does not identify
the adrenal source of aldosterone excess for the APA group. The most effective
strategy in our model was steroid profiling followed by selective AVS in those
patients designated by peripheral venous steroid profiling to have high likelihood
of an APA. Here, 20 patients would have been falsely classified and treated as
BAH while 6 patients with BAH falsely classified as APA by AVS would have
been spared unnecessary adrenalectomy. Notably, the requirements for AVS
would have been reduced by 43%.
Conclusion
Steroid profiling followed by AVS in the APA group could provide an alternative
to AVS alone for subtype differentiation in PA patients, thereby significantly
reducing the need for AVS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP9
GP10
PRKACA somatic mutations are rare in aldosterone-producing
adenomas.
Yara Rhayem1, Luis Gustavo Perez-Rivas1, Anna Dietz1, Kerstin Bathon2,
Christian Gebhard1, Anna Riester1, Brigitte Mauracher1,
Celso Gomez-Sanchez3,4, Thomas Schwarzmayr5,6, Davide Calebiro2,7,
Tim M. Strom5,6, Martin Reincke1 & Felix Beuschlein1
1Department of Endocrine Research, Klinikum der Universitat Munchen,
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany;2Institute of Pharma-
cology and Toxicology, University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany;
3Division of Endocrinology, G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery VA Medical
Center, Jackson, Mississippi, USA;4Department of Medicine-Endo-
crinology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi,
USA;5Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen, Munich,
Germany;6Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universitat Munchen,
Munich, Germany;7Rudolf Virchow Center for Experimental Biomedicine,
University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany.
Aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs) are the most frequent cause of primary
aldosteronism (PA). Somatic mutations of KCNJ5, ATP1A1, CACNA1D and
ATP2B3 are involved in APAs formation while CTNNB1 and GNAS somatic
mutations have been described in both APAs and in cortisol-producing adenomas
(CPAs). In contrast, mutations of PRKACA coding for the catalytic subunit of
protein kinase A have been yet only identified in CPAs.
We investigated a consecutive series of APAs from 122 Conn-patients after
unilateral  adrenalectomy.  We  performed  exome  or  bidirectional  Sanger
sequencing of tumor-tissue and evaluated mutations in candidate genes as well
as PRKACA. Exome sequencing revealed PRKACA somatic mutations in two
APAs (1.6%). One APA carried a L206R mutation, previously described only in
cortisol-producing adenoma with overt Cushing’s syndrome, while in the second
case a newly identified H88D mutation was found. Both affected patients were
females with hypokalemic hypertension, aldosterone excess and lateralization
during adrenal venous sampling. We functionally characterized the enzymatic
activity  of  L206R  and  H88D  mutated  PKA  catalytic  subunit  in  vitro  and
characterized the immunoexpression of steroidogenic enzymes in affected tissues.
Functional analysis showed  that the newly found  H88D mutation  was not
associated  with  gain  of  function  of  PKA.  Interestingly,  while  CYP11B2
expression  was  found  in  the  H88D-mutated  APA,  no  co-expression  of
CYP11B1 was present. In contrast, in the L206R-mutated APA, CYP11B1 was
expressed while CYP11B2 was weak or negative. Accordingly, biochemical
Cushing’s syndrome was present only in the patient with the L206R mutation.
Following adrenalectomy, both patients improved with a reduced number of
antihypertensive medications and normalized potassium levels. We describe here
for the first time PRKACA mutations in APAs as rare findings associated with PA.
As  cortisol  co-secretion  occurs  in  a  sub-group  of  APAs  other  molecular
mechanisms are likely to exist.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP10
GP11
Adrenal hormones as independent predictor factors of mortality during
sepsis or septic shock
Rocio De Castro Fernández1, David Ruiz Ochoa1, Jose Ángel Lamsfus
Prieto1, Bernardo Alio Lavín Gómez2, In˜ igo Tejado Elviro1,
Gilberto Marcano Rodriguez1 & Miguel Santiban˜ ez Marguello3
1Sierrallana Hospital, Torrelavega, Spain;2Marqués de Valdecilla
Universitary Hospital, Santander, Spain;3University of Cantabria,
IDIVAL, Santander, Spain.
Introduction
Activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is critical for adaptation to
stress and serious illness. The imbalance between anti-inflammatory activity of
cortisol and proinflammatory activity of the androgens, dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA) and dihydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) can be an important
predictor factor of mortality in sepsis.
Material and methods
Patients diagnosed of severe sepsis or septic shock admitted to critical unit of
Sierrallana Hospital in Torrelavega (Spain). Cortisol, DHEA and DHEAS were
determined in the first 24 h of admission and mortality was recorded at 28 days.
For each biomarker, area under curve (AUC) and its 95% CI were estimated by
using ROC curves. Levels of biomarkers were ordinal categorized in tertiles (T1,
T2 and T3), and as association measure odds ratios (OR) with their 95% CI
adjusted for age, sex, SOFA and the presence of severe sepsis or septic shock were
estimated.
Results
Data were obtained from 72 patients: median age 67.23 (IQR 17.9); 42/72 males
(59.7%); 9/72 mortality at 28 days (12.7%). Predictive accuracy of biomarkers
was: AUC total cortisol 0.74; 95% CI (0.55-0.93). AUC DHEA 0.55; 95% CI
(0.34-0.76); AUC DHEAS 0,65 (0.50-0.79); AUC cortisol/DHEA 0.74 (0.55-
0.92);  AUC  cortisol/DHEAS  0.79
(0.65-0.94).  With  regard  to  the  risk  of
mortality for the patients at the higher tertil (T3) in comparison with the lower
tertile (T1), the associations were: OR (total cortisol)Z3.24 (0.56-18.76). OR
(total cortisol/DHEA)Z10.00 (1.10-90.59). OR (total cortisol/DHEAS)Z4.17
(0.80-21.85). The results were not affected after adjusting for age, sex, SOFA
scale or diagnosis of severe sepsis or septic shock.
Conclusion
Our results suggest that markers of adrenal function are independent predictors of
mortality in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. The predictive ability
discriminated  by  the  AUC  of  the  ROC  curve  is  higher  for  the  ratios
cortisol/DHEA and cortisol/DHEAs that for isolated values.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP11
GP12
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) in adulthood
Jana Vrbikova1, Zdenek Frysak2, Jan Cap3, Michal Krcma4,
Renata Cifkova5 & Vera Lanska6
1Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic;2IIIrd Clinic of
Internal Medicine FN Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic;3IVth Clinic of
Internal Medicine FN Hradec Králové, Hradec Králové, Czech Republic;
4Ist Clinic of Internal Medicine FN Plzenˇ, Plzen, Czech Republic; 5Center of
Cardiovascular Prevention 1.LF and TN Praha, Prague, Czech Republic;
6IKEM, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background and aim
Up to now, there is paucity of studies concerning health status in adults with
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). We aimed to examine a group of adult
CAH patients from different Czech centers.
Methods
Serum lipids, glucose, blood pressure and anhtropometrics were compared in
31 males and 71 females with CAH 21-hydroxylase deficiency and in healthy
population from Czech post-MONICA study (1% random population sample).
Vy´ sledky: CAH males were significantly smaller (161.4 (1.3) vs 178.5 (0.2) cm;
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
PZ0.0001), had lower total (4.6 (0.23) vs 5.2 (0.02) mmol/l; PZ0.009) a and
higher HDL-cholesterol (1.5 (0.07) vs. 1.30 (0.009) mmol/l; PZ0.004) and lower
triglycerides (1.16 (0.19) vs 1.6 (0.02) mmol/l, PZ0.02) than healthy males.
Dyslipidemia (total cholesterol R 5 or LDL cholesterol R3 mmol/) was present
in 24% of them.
Women with CAH were significantly smaller (154.9 (0.8) vs 165.7 (0.2) cm; PZ
0.0001), had higher BMI (28.5 (0.7) vs 26.5 (0.14) kg/m2 PZ0.005), higher total
(5.49
(0.13)  vs
5.16
(0.02)  mmol/l;  PZ0.02)  and  higher  HDL-cholesterol
(1.8(0.06)  vs
1.63
(0.009)  mmol/l;  PZ0.002)  than  healthy  females.  Total
cholesterol  R5 mmol/l  was  present  in
56%  of  them  and  LDL-cholesterol
R3 mmol/l in 41%.
Osteopenia/osteoporosis was present in 35% (5/14) males and in 31% (8/26)
females.
Conclusion
CAH males do not have impaired cardiovascular risk factors. In CAH women,
dyslipidemia was present in 56 and obesity was more common than in healthy
population.
Supported by Czech ministry of health EU, 00023761.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP12
GP13
ACTH stimulation test (250 mg): is salivary cortisol an alternative to
serum cortisol?
Lara Albert1, Olga Giménez-Palop1, Ismael Capel1, Jose Miguel González-
Clemente1, David Subías1, Jorge Sánchez-Delgado2,3, Joaquim Profitós2,
Eugenio Berlanga4, Laia Casamitjana1 & Mercedes Rigla1
1Endocrinology Department, Hospital de Sabadell, Corporació Sanitària
Parc Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí, UAB, Sabadell, Catalunya,
Spain;2Hepatology Department, Hospital de Sabadell, Corporació Sanitària
Parc Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí, UAB, Sabadell, Catalunya,
Spain;3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Sabadell,
Catalunya, Spain;4Laboratory Department, UDIAT, Hospital de Sabadell,
Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Insitut Universitari Parc Taulí., Sabadell,
Catalunya, Spain.
Introduction
Most serum cortisol (SeC) is linked to cortisol binding globulin and albumin.
When the synthesis of proteins is reduced or increased, SeC does not reflect the
actual free cortisol (FC) (active fraction). Methods for FC analysis are very
laborious and expensive, which makes difficult to use them as a routine laboratory
tests. Salivary cortisol (SaC) mirrors the FC in serum, being its measurement
easier and cheaper. The determination of SaC, instead of total cortisol after
stimulation  with  ACTH,  has  been  proposed  as  an  alternative  for  adrenal
insufficiency diagnosis, but this test has not been standardized yet. The goal of this
study is to determinate the reference values for SaC after stimulation with 250 mg
of ACTH i.v. and their correlation with those for SeC.
Methods and design
Forty-five healthy volunteers and 39 patients with known adrenal insufficiency
(primary or secondary) were included. After at least 8 h fast, serum and saliva
samples were collected before and after the administration of 250 mg of ACTH
i.v. for the determination of cortisol in times: 00 , 300 , 600
and 900 . Patients
received their last dosage of hidrocortisone at 0900 h the day before.
Results
All healthy volunteers had a SeC peak at 30 min R18 mg/dl. Healthy volunteers
SaC  [meanGSD  (range),  mg/dl]  was:
00:0.56G0.31(0.08-1.37);
300 ;1.58G
0.45(0.83-2.72); 600 :2.35G0.63(1.43-4.24); 900 :2.91G0.82(1.63-5.42). Patients
SaC  [meanGSD  (range),  mg/dl]  was:
00:0.33G0.30(0.05-1.53);
300 :0.32G
0.24(0.05-1.17) 600 :0.32G0.24(0.05-0.90); 900 :0.37G0.50(0.05-3.13). The SaC
correlated with SeC at all times, except in time 00  for the group of patients.
Healthy volunteers lower limit value SaC at 600  was 1.43 mg/dl. This cut-off
classified all patients correctly.
Conclusion
Measurement of SaC offers an alternative to SeC ACTH stimulation test (250 mg).
We suggest that adrenal insufficiency can be excluded when SaC at 600
is
R1.43 mg/dl.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP13
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP14
A Phase 3b, open-label, extension study to evaluate the long-term safety
of once-daily, dual-release hydrocortisone (DR-HC) in patients with
adrenal insufficiency (AI)
Anna Nilsson1, Ragnhildur Bergthorsdottir1, Pia Burman2, Per Dahlqvist3,
Bertil Ekman4, Britt Edén Engstrom5, Oskar Ragnarsson1, Stanko Skrtic1,6,
Jeanette Wahlberg4, Heinrich Achenbach7, Sharif Uddin8, Claudio Marelli7
& Gudmundur Johannsson1
1Department of Endocrinology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital and
Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden;2Department of Endocrinology, Ska˚ne University
Hospital Malmo, University of Lund, Malmo, Sweden;3Department of
Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Ume
˚ University, Umea˚, Sweden;
4Department of Endocrinology and Department of Medical and Health
Sciences, Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden;5Department of
Medical Sciences, Endocrinology and Mineral Metabolism, University
Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden;6AstraZeneca R&D, Molndal, Sweden;7Shire
International GmbH, Zug, Switzerland;8Shire, Lexington, Massachusetts,
USA.
Introduction
Glucocorticoid replacement for adrenal insufficiency (AI) remains inadequate,
resulting  in  high  morbidity,  premature  mortality  and  quality-of-life
(QoL)
impairment.  This  study  investigated  the  long-term  safety  of  dual-release
hydrocortisone (DR-HC) in patients with primary AI.
Methods
AI patients who completed a randomized, 3-month crossover study of once-daily
DR-HC versus thrice-daily conventional immediate-release hydrocortisone plus a
6-month extension of DR-HC (Study 1; nZ55) or who were newly recruited
(nZ16) were included in an open-label, 5-year study of DR-HC (Study 2).
Outcomes included safety, intercurrent illness episodes and QoL. Study 2 results
are presented for baseline (start of Study 2) to 5 years.
Results
In Study 1, DR-HC was well tolerated and improved metabolic factors, blood
pressure and QoL [Johannsson et al. J Clin Endocrin Metab 2012;97:473K81]. In
Study 2, 88.7% of patients completed the 5-year visit. Seventy patients (98.6%)
reported 1060 adverse events (AEs), of which 84.8% were unrelated to DR-HC.
Of 65 serious AEs reported by 32 patients (45.1%), four were possibly related to
DR-HC: acute AI (nZ2), gastritis (nZ1), syncope (nZ1). Two deaths were
reported (fall from height, subarachnoid haemorrhage), both unrelated to DR-HC.
For each 12-month period of the 5-year study, mean number of intercurrent illness
episodes per patient varied from 2.64 to 5.42 and mean hydrocortisone dose per
episode varied from 18.7 to 23.5 mg. Mean fasting plasma glucose (0.7 mmol/l;
P!0.0001) and HDL-cholesterol (0.2 mmol/l; P!0.0001) increased. Patient-
assessed DR-HC tolerability was better in 29.5% of patients, equal in 60.7% and
worse in 9.8% at 5 years versus baseline (PZ0.02). There were no significant
changes in Fatigue Impact Scale (FIS) or Psychological General Well Being total
scores, but FIS physical functioning worsened (PZ0.008).
Conclusions
Long-term DR-HC therapy for AI patients was well tolerated with no safety
concerns. Intercurrent illness episodes were stable, and fasting glucose and HDL-
cholesterol increased during 5 years’ treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP14
GP15
Reduced temperature and the chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyrate
enhance stability of CYP21A2 mutations
Yiqing Chen1, Kerstin Schaefer1, Maria Gasteiger1, Angela Taylor2,
Wiebke Arlt2, Nils Krone3, Soeren W. Gersting4 & Nicole Reisch1
1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV; Klinikum der Universitat Munchen,
Munich, Bavaria, Germany;2Institute of Metabolism and Systems
Research; University of Birmingham, Birmingham, West Midlands, UK;
3Academic Unit of Child Health, Department of Oncology and Metabolism;
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, Yorkshire and the Humber, UK;
4Melokulare Padiatrie Dr. von Haunersches Kinderspital; Kinderspital der
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Munchen, Munich, Bavaria, Germany.
Background
Mutations of 21-hydroxylase (CYP21A2) cause congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Its severe (classic) form constitutes a life-threatening disease. Patients suffer a
significant disease burden due to co-morbidities that are often treatment-related.
The current therapeutic situation is unsatisfying and demands novel treatment
approaches. In silico modelling suggests protein misfolding and intracellular
retention to play a significant role in the pathogenesis of CAH.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Objective
To investigate protein misfolding and intracellular retention due to CYP21A2
mutations and explore pharmacological chaperones as potential therapeutic tools.
Methods
Clinically relevant CYP21A2 mutations where in silico modelling suggested
protein misfolding to play a role in the pathogenesis of CAH were selected and
subcloned into pcDNA6-V5/His expressing vectors. Residual activity of variant
CYP21A2 proteins was determined in living COS-7 cells using an enzyme
activity assay with LC/MSMS based analysis of steroids. The effect of mutations
on protein half-life (susceptibility to proteinase K) was measured comparing
wild-type and variant CYP21A2. The influence of 4-PBA and temperature on
protein half-life was investigated.
Results
Our preliminary results show that with decreased temperature, susceptibility of
selected mutations to proteolysis was significantly attenuated (protein half-life
increased from 0.9 minG0.4 to 5.9 minG0.8 for G90V; from 1.4 minG0.1 to
5.5 minG0.9 for P30L; from 1.0 minG0.1 to 8.0 minG1.3 for P30Q; from
0.6 minG0.1 to 9.8 minG1.0 for R356W). The use of the chemical chaperone
4-PBA enhanced CYP21A2 half-life (3.8 minG0.5 to 11.0 minG1.6 for G375S).
The same applied when the temperature was reduced to 30 8C resulting in partial
rescue of the CYP21A2 loss-of-function phenotype.
Conclusions
Our preliminary data substantiate the hypothesis of protein misfolding with loss-
of-function as a relevant molecular mechanism in CAH that can be addressed by
structural stabilisation of CYP21A2.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP15
GP16
Increased morbidity and hospital admissions in patients with adrenal
insufficiency
Paul M Stewart1, Beverly MK Biller2, Claudio Marelli3,
Candace Gunnarsson4, Michael Ryan4 & Gudmundur Johannsson5
1Medical School, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK;2Neuroendocrine Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;3Shire
International GmbH, Zug, Switzerland;4CTI Clinical Trial and Consulting,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA;5Department of Endocrinology, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Introduction
Patients with adrenal insufficiency (AI) (primary (PAI), secondary to pituitary
disease
(PIT) and congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)) have reduced life
expectancy with reported standardized mortality ratios of w2:1 but given the
rarity of AI, the underlying explanation remains largely unknown.
Objective
To evaluate patient characteristics, prevalence of concomitant conditions and
hospitalization incidence in patients with AI compared to a general population
sample.
Methods
Using a US-based national payer database comprising O108 million patients, we
used strict inclusion criteria with robust diagnostic codes and pharmacy fill
records of steroid prescriptions to identify 10 383 patients with AI; 1014 with
PAI, 8818 with PIT and 551 with CAH were followed for O12 months. Patients
were matched 1:1 to controls, based on age (G5 years), gender, insurance type
and region.
80
Dexamethasone
Hydrocortisone
Prednisone
62
60
Multiple steroids
55
40
34
27
27
20
20
20
16
13
12
12
1
0
CAH
PAI
PIT
Figure 1 Steroid usage in the 6-12-month period after diagnosis
of AI.
Results
Figure 1 shows steroids used according to AI cohort. Compared with controls,
patients  with  AI  had  higher  odds  of  diabetes  mellitus,  hypertension,
hyperlipidaemia and depression and anxiety ranging from an OR of 1.51 for
hyperlipidaemia in PAI and CAH to 3.85 for diabetes in CAH. The odds of having
diabetes (ORZ3.85, 95% CIZ2.52-5.90) or anxiety (ORZ2.99, 95% CIZ2.02-
4.42) were highest in CAH, while depression was highest in the PAI and PIT
cohorts (ORZ2.40 and 2.55). Hyperlipidaemia and hypertension (ORZ1.98 and
2.24) were more common in the PIT cohort versus controls. Inpatient admissions
were more frequent in PAI and PIT versus controls; for every 1 control inpatient
admission,  there  were  an  estimated
4.64
admissions  for  the  PAI  cohort
(P!0.0001) and 4.00 admissions for the PIT cohort (P!0.0001). Infection
was the most common cause for admission.
Conclusion
Using data from O10 000 adults with AI, our study suggests that all types of AI
carry  a  significant  metabolic  and  psychiatric  burden,  with  higher  risk  of
comorbidities and hospital admissions compared to the general population sample.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP16
GP17
Improved evening and nocturnal cortisol exposure time profile in
patients with adrenal insufficiency treated with dual release
hydrocortisone: correlation with improvement in metabolic profile
Chiara Simeoli, Rosario Ferrigno, Maria Cristina De Martino,
Renata Simona Auriemma, Claudia Pivonello, Mariarosaria Negri,
Davide Iacuaniello, Gilda Di Gennaro, Annamaria Colao &
Rosario Pivonello
Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Sezione di Endocrinologia,
Università Federico II di Napoli, Naples, Italy.
Conventional glucocorticoids (GCs) are unable to mimic physiological cortisol
rhythm in adrenal insufficiency (AI), with a significant impact on morbidity and
mortality. Possible explanations are supra-physiological doses and impaired
cortisol profile. In particular, elevated evening cortisol levels were related to
glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity alterations and visceral obesity. Once-
daily-dual-release-hydrocortisone (OD-DR-HC), better reproducing the physio-
logical cortisol profile, reported metabolic improvements in primary AI (PAI)
patients switched from immediate release HC, thrice daily, to OD-DR-HC. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the cortisol profile and its impact on metabolic
outcome in PAI and secondary AI (SAI) patients treated with cortisone acetate
twice daily (CA-BID). Eight AI patients on CA-BID underwent full sampling for
serum cortisol during 24 h, at 3 h intervals, at baseline and 6 months after the
switch to OD-DR-HC. Mean (0700-1300 h) AUC was 5.76% (PZ1) higher,
whereas mean (1300-1900 h), (1900-0100 h), (1300-0700 h), and (1900-0700 h)
AUC were 5.92% (PZ0.6), 48.69% (PZ0.008), 25.08% (PZ0.031) and 40.12%
(PZ0.008) lower with OD-DR-HC than with CA-BID, respectively. Mean total
cortisol (1900-0700 h) AUC was 14.4% lower (PZ0.148) with OD-DR-HC than
with  CA-BID.  The  afternoon  peak  with  CA-BID  was  not  observed  with
OD-DR-HC. Moreover, the decrease in (1900-0100 h) and (0100-1900 h) AUC
was significantly correlated with glucose level decrease (rZ0.99; P!0.001) and
insulin  sensitivity  index
(ISI)  increase
1200
after  glucose  load
(rZK0.99;
P!0.001),  as  well  as  with  waist  circumference
(rZ0.98;  P!0.001)  and
triglycerides  level  reduction
(rZ0.95;  P!0.001).  In  conclusion,  total
24 h
cortisol profile was reduced by 14.4%, providing a higher exposure during the first
6 h in the morning and then significant reductions throughout day and night.
OD-DR-HC reduces late afternoon, evening and nocturnal GC overexposure,
avoiding the second afternoon peak, suggesting a significant improvement in
glucose tolerance, visceral adiposity and lipid profile. Further studies are needed
to confirm and extend these preliminary data.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP17
GP18
Restoration of HPA axis is rapid in subclinical Cushing’s syndrome
after adrenalectomy
Hee Kyung Kim, Yunah Jeong, Jee Hee Yoon & Ho-Cheol Kang
Chonnam National Univeristy Medical School, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea.
Objective
In  subclinical  Cushing’s  syndrome
(SC),  it  is  assumed  that  glucocorticoid
production is insufficient to cause a clinically recognizable syndrome. Differences
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
in hormonal levels or recovery time of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical
(HPA) axis after adrenalectomy between patients with overt Cushing’s syndrome
(OC) and SC remain unknown.
Design and patients
Thirty seven patients (ten were OC and 27 were SC) with adrenal Cushing’s
syndrome who underwent adrenalectomy from 2004 to 2014 were reviewed
retrospectively. Patients were treated with glucocorticoid after adrenalectomy,
and adrenal function was evaluated every 1-6 months with a rapid ACTH
stimulation test.
Results
Patients with SC were older than patients with OC. Levels of basal 24-h urine free
cortisol (24hUFC), serum cortisol after an overnight dexamethasone suppression
test (DST), and serum cortisol and 24hUFC after low- and high-dose DST were all
significantly lower in patients with SC compared with OC (P!0.01). The
probability of recovering adrenal function differed significantly between patients
with OC and SC (PZ0.001), with significant correlations with the degree of
preoperative cortisol excess. Patients with OC required a longer duration of
glucocorticoid replacement to recover a normal ACTH stimulation test compared
with patients with SC (median 13.5 vs 4 months, P !0.001), and seven patients
with SC (26%) did not receive steroid replacement after adrenalectomy.
Conclusions
The HPA axis recovery time after adrenalectomy in patients with SC is rapid
(within several months) and is dependent on the degree of cortisol excess.
Routine  postoperative glucocorticoid replacement  is not  necessary  in some
patients with SC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP18
GP19
MUC-1: update on a newly established tumor model for adrenocortical
carcinoma
Constanze Hantel, Igor Shapiro, Sara Jung, Martin Reincke &
Felix Beuschlein
Endocrine Research Unit, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
In an attempt, to overcome the lack of preclinical models for adrenocortical
carcinoma (ACC), we recently aimed at the development of patient-individual
tumor models for ACC. During these studies one xenograft (MUC-1), derived
from a neck metastasis of an ACC, showed extraordinary engraftment properties
and sustained tumor growth over several passages in the murine host. During
ongoing studies we investigated and compared all currently available xenograft
models for ACC (NCI-H295R, SW-13 and SJ-ACC3) regarding Ki67, SF-1 and
EGF-receptor status among others with the newly established MUC-1 xenografts.
In vitro, we established a primary culture based on explanted MUC-1 xenograft
pieces. A first try of cell culture establishment failed after several passages due to
a massive contamination by murine fibroblasts. Thus, we initiated a second round
of  culturing  involving  continuous  and  highly  specific  murine  and  human
fibroblast removal. The resulting multi-clonal cell suspension is now viable in
passage 15. In these cultures, cross-contamination by murine fibroblasts could be
excluded on the basis of a Universal-Primer Probe-Assay. Representative pictures
of passages 4, 7, 10 and 13 demonstrate furthermore specific Ki67 as well as
nuclear SF-1 and cytoplasmic 3ßHSD immunopositivity. Moreover, genetic
characteristics  of  MUC-1
cells  were  investigated  by  PCR-Single-Locus
Technology  ensuring  a  distinct  marker  profile  different  from  that  of  NCI-
H295R and SW-13 cells. Thereby, MUC-1 cells were recently authentified as a
novel adrenocortical cell line of human origin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP19
GP20
Responsiveness to hCG in postmenopausal women with adrenal
adenomas
Bojana Popovic, Djuro Macut, Ivana Bozic-Antic, Tamara Bogavac,
Dusan Ilic, Tatjana Isailovic, Valentina Elezovic, Sanja Ognjanovic &
Svetozar Damjanovic
Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolic Diseases, Belgrade,
Serbia.
Introduction
Luteinizning hormone (LH/hCG) responsiveness has been documented in both
normal  and  pathological  adrenal  glands,  but  it  is  unclear  whether  chronic
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
exposure to LH could affect adrenal function by increasing LH receptor (LHR)
expression.
Subjects and methods
We studied 12 postmenopausal women with previously documented adrenal
tumor. All patients underwent standard hormonal testing for assessment of tumor
functionality.  Then  hCG  test  was  performed  with  measurement  of  adrenal
androgens and estradiol levels from the blood. A 50% or more change of plasma
level from baseline was considered as positive response. Statistical analysis was
done by SPSS Software.
Results
Our patients were
60.4G5.8 years old  (54-71), and were 12.4G7.9 years
postmenopausal (1-23). Five patients (41.7%) had Cushing’s syndrome, three of
which had bilateral adrenal tumors, and the remaining seven had unilateral,
clinically nonfunctional adrenal adenoma. By adequate rise in levels of estradiol,
testosterone, DHEA-S and 17-OH progesterone we identified six patients (50%)
that could be categorized as responders to hCG. Three out of five patients with
Cushing’s syndrome were responders, and three out of seven patients with
nonfunctional tumors. There was no significant correlation between LH level and
years after menopause with percent of change in any hormone tested (PO(0.05).
Responders and non-responders were not significantly different in any of the basal
hormonal  levels
(PO(0.05),  but  were  significantly  different  in  percents  of
hormone level change of all tested hormones (PZ0.019 for estradiol, PZ0.002
for 17-OH progesterone, PZ0.013 for testosterone, and PZ0.029 for DHEA-S).
Among responders, there was no difference in hormonal responses to hCG
regarding presence of Cushing’s syndrome (PO(0.05 for all).
Conclusion
Responsiveness to hCG was more prevalent in our group of postmenopausal
women than previously reported in patients with adrenal adenomas, suggesting a
possible role of long term LH exposure.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP20
GP21
Clinical characteristics and tumour size evolution in patients with
bilateral adrenal tumours
Simona Galoiu1,2, Raluca Pena1, Raluca Trifanescu1,2,
Dan Alexandru Niculescu1,2, Anda Dumitrascu2, Andra Caragheorgheopol2,
Carmen Iordachescu2 & Catalina Poiana1,2
1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;
2C. I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania.
10% of patients with adrenal tumours have bilateral lesion.
Objective
To evaluate clinical, imagistic and hormonal characteristics of bilateral adrenal
tumours.
Design and mehods
Retrospective series of
150 consecutive patients (104F, 46M) with bilateral
adrenal tumours with maximal diameter of at least 1 cm, evaluated from 2001 to
2015 in a tertiary endocrinology clinic with clinical, hormonal and imagistic
methods.
Results
Age at diagnostic was 57.26G10.32 years (27-85). In 122 patients, adrenal
tumours were diagnosed simultaneously, and 28 patients had metachronous
tumours. Mean tumor size was 2.4G2.3 cm (right) and 2.5G2.4 cm (left). 22%
patients  had  functioning  tumours
(22
patients  with  cortisol  hypersecretion,
including subclinical Cushing’s syndrome, eight patients with pheocromocitoma,
three  patients  with  aldosterone  hypersecretion).  Four  patients  had  adrenal
carcinoma  and  ten  patients  adrenal  bilateral  metastasis.  Clinical  evaluation
revealed younger age (44.90G12.98 years) in patients with pheocromocitoma
and  higher  blood  glucose
(123.75G52.26 mg/dl  vs
103.34G26.62 mg/dl,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
PZ0.03) and tumor diameters (3.48G2.22 cm vs 2.23G2.42 cm, PZ0.02 -
right side and 3.86G2.23 cm vs 2.31G2.43 cm, PZ0.007 - left side) in patients
with cortisol secreting tumours as compared to patients with nonfunctioning
tumours. Mean follow-up was 1.84G0.89 years in patients with synchronous
tumours; in patients with metachronous tumours, second tumour was diagnosed
after
5.44G9.37 years (maximum 49 years). In nonoperated nonfunctioning
tumours, nonsignificant tumour size evolution was observed.
Conclusion
Our  study  suggests  cortisol  hypersecretion  is  the  most  frequent  hormonal
abnormality  in  patients  with  bilateral  adrenal  tumours.  Although  most
nonfunctioning tumours are nonevolutive, as 9.3% of patients have primary or
secondary adrenal cancer, conservative long-term follow up is needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP21
GP22
Clinical and polysomnographical evaluation of sleep in patients with
Cushing’s syndrome
Sevda Ismailogullari2, Sedat Tarik Firat1, Zuleyha Karaca1,
Fatih Tanriverdi1, Kursad Unluhizarci1 & Fahrettin Kelestimur1
1
Erciyes University Medical School Department of Endocrinology, Kayseri,
Turkey;2Erciyes University Medical School Department of Neurology,
Kayseri, Turkey.
Introduction
Patients with Cushing’s Syndrome (CS) frequently have sleep complaints. The
aim of the study was to evaluate the prevalance sleep disturbances and sleep
structure of patients with CS.
Materials and methods
33 patients with CS were evaluated both clinically and with polysomnograhy
(PSG) findings in terms of sleep disorders and data were compared with 20
healthy controls.
Results
Seventeen (51.1%) patients with CS demonstrated sleep apnea (Apnea Hypopnea
Index (AHI)R5), with seven (21%) of 17 had severe sleep apnea (AHIR30). Five
(15%) patients had periodic limb movements (PLM) of sleep (PLM Index R15),
20
(60%) patients had clinical insomnia, and two (6.1%) patients had restless legs
syndrome.  None  of  the  CS  patients  complained  of  hypersomnia
(Epworth
sleepiness scale R10). PSG parameters were compared only if participants had an
AHI!5 and PLMI!15. The percentage of stage N2 sleep was significantly
increased in CS patients (65.3G11.4%) compared to control subjects (54.4G
13.3%). Although total sleep time (297.9G104.0 min in CS, vs 354.8G52.8 min
in controls) and percentage of time spent in stage N3 sleep (12.9G1.9% in CS, vs
23.3G16.2% in controls) was reduced in CS patients, the difference was not
statistically significant. Average heart rate
(73.7G6.9/min in CS, vs 65.6G
7.5/min in controls) and minimum heart rates (58.8G6.1/min in CS, vs 51.8G
7.6/min in controls) were significantly higher in CS patients. There was a
significant positive correlation between post-dexamethasone cortisol levels and
AHI, and midnight cortisol levels and AHI in REM sleep. Minimum O2 saturation
was found to be negatively correlated with midnight cortisol and basal cortisol
levels.
Conclusion
Insomnia and sleep apnea are frequent sleep disorders in CS patients. Absence of
hypersomnia, alterations in sleep structure and higher heart rate during sleep
support a hyperarousal state in CS. These alterations may potentially influence
metabolic comorbidities associated with CS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP22
GP23
Deterioration of indices of insulin resistance in patients with
non-functioning and cortisol secreting adrenal incidentalomas during a
long term follow-up
Labrini Papanastasiou1,3, Krystallenia Alexandraki2,3,
Stelios Fountoulakis1,3, Theodora Kounadi1,3, Athina Markou1,3,
Vaios Tsiavos1,3, Ioannis Androulakis1,3, Christianna Samara1,3,
George Piaditis1,3 & Gregory Kaltsas2,3
1Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Center, ‘G Gennimatas’
General Hospital, Athens, Greece;2Department of Pathophysiology, Laikon
Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Medical School,
Athens, Greece;3Department of Radiology, ‘G Gennimatas’ General
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Adrenal incidentalomas (AI) with or without concomitant autonomous cortisol
secretion can be associated with several metabolic alterations that may lead to
increased cardiovascular risk. However, data regarding insulin resistance (IR)
during long term follow-up of AI are scarce. The aim was to prospectively
investigate the presence and evolution of IR in patients with AI between 2003 and
2014.
Methods
Seventy three patients with AI for at least a 3-year follow-up underwent a
diagnostic  protocol,  which  included  clinical  examination,  anthropometric
assessment, basal and dynamic adrenal testing for autonomous cortisol secretion
(low dose dexamethasone suppression test). IR was define at HOMA O2.16 and
QUICKI!0.34.  Pheochromocytomas,  aldosterone  secreting  adenomas  and
adrenocortical carcinomas were excluded.
Results
During  the  follow-up
(5.60G1.74
years)  AI  max  diameter  was  increased
(P!0.001) but this increase measured !0.5 cm; BMI (PZ0.02) and waist
circumference (PZ0.001) increased, while more patients developed hypertension
(11%), dyslipidemia (22%) and diabetes mellitus (T2DM). At baseline 2 (2.7%)
patients were found to have T2DM that increased to 9 (12.3%) at the last follow-
up (P!0.001). Hence, T2DM developed in 9.4% of patients with non-functioning
AI (NFAI) and 20% with subtle autonomous cortisol secretion (CSAI). Moreover,
49.3% of patients had IR that increased to 68.5% at the last follow-up (P!0.001).
At baseline, 41.5% of NFAI and 70% of CSAI patients exhibited IR compared to
58.5% of NFAI and 95% of CSAI at the last follow-up (P!0.001 and 0.3
respectively). At baseline, 20 AI patients had CSAI that increased to 31 at last
follow-up
(P!0.001).  There  was  a  positive  correlation  between  post-
dexamethasone cortisol levels (F-post-LDDST) and indices of IR in the whole
group of patients both at baseline and at the last follow-up
Conclusions
Apparently non-functioning and/or autonomous cortisol secreting AI exhibit
deterioration of carbohydrates metabolism and IR over a O3years follow-up that
correlates with the F-post-LDDST levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP23
GP24
Does measurement of serum dexamethasone increase diagnostic
accuracy of the overnight dexamethasone-suppression test?
Grethe 
˚strømUeland1,2, Paal Methlie1,2, Hrafnkell Baldur Thordasron2,
Kristian Løvås1,2, Oskar Kelp4, Gunnar Mellgren1,3 & Eystein Husebye1,2
1Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway;
2Haukeland University Hospoial, Department of Internal Medicine, Bergen,
Norway;3Hormone Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway;4Akershus University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
Background
1-mg overnight dexamethasone-suppression test (DST) is commonly used to
screen for hypercortisolism. Sensitivity is high (95%), but specificity is low (80%),
leading to false positive results. Identifying individuals with abnormal
dexamethasone absorption or metabolism could enhance diagnostic accuracy.
Aim
Use serum dexamethasone (s-DXT) to increase diagnostic accuracy of DST.
Methods
Prospective study of DST for clinical suspicion of Cushing’s syndrome (CS)
(nZ49), incidentaloma (nZ152), and healthy controls (nZ101). S-cortisol and
s-DXT  were  assayed  by  liquid  chromatography  tandem  mass  spectrometry
(LCMSMS). DST results were correlated to the final diagnosis based on current
clinical guidelines.
Results
83/302 did not suppress s-cortisol (!50 nmol/l). Of these 11 had overt CS, and 27
subclinical CS (16% of the incidentalomas). A s-DXT cut-off level at 3.3 nmol/l
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
was chosen based on the 2.5% quantile of DXT in those suppressing s-cortisol
!50 nmol/l. Applying this cut-off, 10/302 (3.3%) DSTs were false positive with
both inadequate s-DXT-levels and elevated s-cortisol. Of these, three were
misdiagnosed as subclinical-CS. 12% of the positive DSTs could be explained by
low levels of s- DXT. Among non-CS samples, s-cortisol values were higher in
the incidentaloma-group (median 42.5 nmol/l, range 13-576) than in those with
clinically suspected but not confirmed CS (22.7 nmol/l, 9.9-289) (P!0.01) and
healthy controls (22.2 nmol/l, 8.4-102) (P!0.01). These findings were similar
after eliminating patients with the lowest levels of DXT and estrogen users
(nZ16). Repeating DST in 30 healthy individuals shows excellent reproducibility
of the test (interclass coefficient, ICCZ0,936).
Conclusions
Abnormal absorption or metabolism of dexamethasone is a common reason for
false positive 1-mg DSTs. Simultaneous measurement of s-DXT increases the
accuracy of the test, and reduces the risk of falsely diagnosing subclinical CS.
A minimum  s-DXT  level  of  3.3 nmol/l  is  needed  to  suppress  S-  cortisol
!50 nmol/l.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP24
GP25
Novel genetic changes in Autosomal dominant, ACTH independent
nacronodular adrenal hyperplasia associated with hypercortisolism and
giant adrenals
Gabriel Munter1, Geona Altarescu1, Rachel Beeri1, Annabel Berthon2,
Fabio Rueda Faucz2, Ruchama Weiss1 & Constantine Stratakis2
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center affiliated with the Hebrew University,
Jerusalem, Israel;2National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
ACTH independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH) is a rare cause
of Cushing’s syndrome. Both Phosphodiesterase 11A4 (PDE11A4) mutations and
inactivating mutations of armadillo repeat containing 5(ARMC5) have been
associated with familial AIMAH. A family with autosomal dominant AIMAH
was studied trying to elucidate the involved genetic basis.
Methods and results
Adrenal hypercortisolism with giant bilateral AH was diagnosed in three adult
members of the family, a mother and two sons. Further evaluation excluded the
presence of aberrant receptors. Bilateral adrenalectomy of the index case was
performed showing huge adrenal glands (460 g). DNA were extracted from
peripheral blood lymphocytes. Sequencing of ARMC5 coding region in the
proband  revealed  a  novel  heterozygote  mutation,  S767X.  Interestingly,
sequencing of PDE11A4 coding region revealed a heterozygote rare variant
R867G, that has frequency of 2-3% in the general population. PDE11A4 gene
defects have been associated with Carney complex and AIMAH, including
R867G, probably acting as a phenotype modifier. Inmunohistochemical studies of
the excised adrenal tissue showed a very low expression of PDE11A4 and
ARMC5  compared  to  normal  adrenals.  The  family  was  screened  for
hypercortisolism, adrenal hyperplasia (MRI) and genetic testing. All the patients
with AIMAH carried both variants. Other siblings carrying either one mutation or
none were healthy, with normal adrenal size. A 15 years old daughter of the index
case harbored both variants, but her HPA axis evaluation was normal and the
adrenals showed a normal size.
Conclusions
A family with ADAIMAH causing giant adrenal hyperplasia associated with a
novel mutation in ARMC5 in conjunction with PDE11A4 mutation, causing low
protein expression is reported. Coexistence of PDE11A4 variant in all three
affected individuals may indicate a phenotype modifier role. Because clinical and
biochemical abnormalities appear during adulthood, young phenotypically normal
mutation carriers may be at risk of developing clinical disease in the future.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP25
GP26
LCI699 is a potent inhibitor of cortisol production in vitro
Sara G Creemers1, Richard A Feelders1, Frank H de Jong1,
Gaston J H Franssen2, Yolanda B de Rijke3, Peter M van Koetsveld1 &
Leo J Hofland1
1Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;2Department of
Surgery, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
3Department of Clinical Chemistry, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
The steroidogenesis inhibitors ketoconazole and metyrapone are frequently used
for treatment of Cushing’s syndrome, but can cause side effects. LCI699 is a
known 11b-hydroxylase inhibitor, but effects on other steroidogenic enzymes are
unknown.  We  aimed  to  compare  effects  of  LCI699,  ketoconazole,  and
metyrapone in vitro.
Methods
HAC-15  cells,  with  or  without
10 nM  ACTH,  and  three  primary  human
adrenocortical adenoma cultures were incubated with LCI699, ketoconazole, or
metyrapone (3 days; 0.01-5 mM). Cortisol was measured in the supernatant using
a chemiluminescence immunoassay system (Immulite 2000Xi), corrected for cell
amount. Steroid profiling was carried out in HAC-15 control and 5 mM treated
cells by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
Results
LCI699 inhibited cortisol production at significantly lower concentrations (EC50:
0.038 mM; 95% CI 0.031-0.048) than ketoconazole (0.764 mM; 0.535-1.092,
P!0.0001),  and  metyrapone
(0.084 mM;
0.0602-0.117,  P!0.0001).  Under
ACTH stimulation (mean cortisol increase 37.4G1.98%, P!0.0001), sensitivity
only changed for LCI699 (0.056 mM; 0.046-0.070, P!0.05 vs basal EC50).
Treatment did not affect cell number. For three primary cultures, the cortisol EC50
of  LCI699  (mean  0.050 mM)  was  significantly  lower  compared  to  that  of
ketoconazole (mean 0.984 mM; P!0.05). LCI699 strongly suppressed corticos-
terone and cortisol (91%, 87%, resp.; both P!0.001), and modestly suppressed
androstenedione (38%), DHEA (38%), DHEAS (33%), testosterone (21%), and
17-hydroxyprogesterone
(9.0%)  production  by  HAC-15
cells
(P!0.05).
Progesterone increased by 70% under LCI699 treatment, while 11-deoxycortisol
remained unchanged. The same trend was seen for metyrapone. Ketoconazole
strongly inhibited concentrations of all steroids (mean 90%, P!0.001), except
progesterone, which increased (644%, P!0.001).
Conclusion
LCI699 is a potent inhibitor of basal- and ACTH-stimulated cortisol production
in adrenocortical tumor cells, and in these conditions seems to block
11b-
hydroxylase (CYP11B1), and to a lesser extent 17,20-lyase activity. Besides, the
absence of strong accumulation of steroid precursors might indicate an inhibition
proximal of 3b-HSD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP26
GP27
Evening not morning plasma cortisol level is higher in women with
polycystic ovary syndrome
Marta Kialka1, Tomasz Milewicz1, Agnieszka Ociepka2,
Magdalena Krzyczkowska-Sendrakowska1 & Ewa Stochmal2
1Department of Gynecological Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University,
Medical College, Cracow, Poland;2Department of Endocrinology,
Jagiellonian University, Medical College, Cracow, Poland.
Introduction
The aim of our study was to assess the morning and evening cortisol plasma levels
in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Material and method
95 patients gave their informed consent to participate in the study and were
divided into two groups. Group A consisted of 40 PCOS patients and group B
consisted of 55 women without features of PCOS. Between day 5 and 8 of the
menstrual cycle, morning (0700 h), fasting blood samples were taken for the
assessment of LH, FSH, estradiol (E2), cortisol, prolactin, TSH, testosterone and
DHEAS. Evening (1700 h) blood samples were also taken for the evaluation of
plasma cortisol level.
Results
There were no differences in mean age, BMI, FSH, SHBG, PRL, E2 and TSH
levels between group A and group B. Mean plasma LH level was higher in group
A compared to group B (10.7G6.8 IU/l vs 6.6G4.5 IU/l, P!0.02). Mean plasma
testosterone and DHEAS levels were also higher in PCOS patients (3.8G
0.6 nmol/l vs 1.63G0.6 nmol/l; 427.7G162.9 vs 236.6G97.8 resp, P!0.001).
Mean evening plasma cortisol level was higher in PCOS patients (11.8G4.1 mg/dl
vs 7.4G5.0 mg/dl, P!0.02). Mean morning plasma cortisol levels did not differ
between groups.
Conclusion
PCOS women showed the increased plasma cortisol level with impacted diurnal
secretion rate.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP27
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
GP28
Restoring the circadian cortisol rhythm with metyrapone in patients
with adrenal incidentalomas and subclinical hypercortisolism reduces
IL6 levels
Miguel Debono1, Robert Harrison1, Rita Chadarevian2, Carole Gueroult2,
Jean-Louis Abitbol2 & John Newell-Price1
1University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK;2HRA Pharma, Paris, France.
Introduction
Patients with adrenal incidentalomas and sub-clinical Cushing’s (SCH) have
increased  cardiovascular  events  and  mortality.  We  hypothesised  that  these
patients have a disturbed cortisol rhythm amenable to being restored to normal by
using timed short-acting cortisol synthesis blockade, and that this may have a
positive effect on IL6 levels.
Methods
In a phase 1, prospective study (Eudract No. 2012-002586-35) we recruited eight
patients with adrenal incidentalomas and SCH and two control groups of six sex,
age and BMI-matched individuals: i) patients with adrenal incidentalomas and no
SCH ii) healthy volunteers with no adrenal incidentaloma. 24-h circadian cortisol
analysis was performed using LC-MS/MS to measure serum cortisol hourly and
salivary cortisol/cortisone when awake, before and after metyrapone. IL6 was
measured.
Results
Patients with SCH had significantly higher nocturnal mean (S.D.) serum cortisol
exposure than both control groups:lnAUC18:00-22:00(6.6(0.4)vs(i)6.1(0.6) and (ii)
6.0(0.3)nmol/l.hr; PZ0.035) and lnAUC22:00-02:00(6.3(0.5)vs(i)5.8(0.4) and (ii)
5.7(0.5)nmol/l.hr; PZ0.040). Similarly, SCH had significantly higher nocturnal
mean (S.D.) salivary cortisone exposure than both control groups:lnAUC20:00-23:00
(3.6(0.5)vs(i)3.0(0.7)  and
(ii)2.8(0.3)nmol/L.hr;  PZ0.02).  In  light  of  these
findings six patients with SCH were administered metyrapone 500 mg at 18:00
and 250 mg at 22:00 with a significant reduction in nocturnal serum cortisol and
salivary cortisone, achieving analogous cortisol exposure to both control groups.
IL6 levels were higher in these six patients with SCH compared to both other
groups combined (lnAUC18:00-22:00  3.2(0.6) vs 2.3(0.7) and lnAUC22:00-02:00
3.3(0.5) vs 2.4(0.8) pg/ml.hr). This intervention was associated with a significant
reduction in IL6 AUC.
Conclusion
We have shown for the first time that patients with SCH have an abnormal cortisol
rhythm with higher cortisol exposure starting from the early evening period and
which was associated with increased circulating IL6 levels. After metyrapone
500 mg at 18:00 and 250 mg at 22:00 nocturnal cortisol levels were ‘re-set’ to
normal; this was associated with a significant reduction in IL6. We hypothesise
that this intervention is likely associated with patient benefit.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP28
GP29
Plasma metabolomics profile in patients with Cushing’s syndrome
Guido Di Dalmazi1, Marcus Quinkler2, Timo Deutschbein4,
Cornelia Prehn5, Nada Rayes3, Matthias Kroiss4, Martin Fassnacht4,
Christina Berr1, Gunter Stalla6, Jerzy Adamski5, Martin Reincke1 &
Felix Beuschlein1
1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universitat Munchen,
Munich, Germany;2Endocrinology in Charlottenburg, Berlin, Germany;
3Department of General-, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, Charité Campus
Virchow Clinic, Berlin, Germany;4Endocrine and Diabetes Unit,
Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital, University of
Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany;5Institute of Experimental Genetics,
Genome Analysis Center, Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen, Munich, Germany;
6Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Clinical Neuroendocrinology Unit,
Munich, Germany.
Background
Cushing’s syndrome (CS) is a chronic disorder characterized by endogenous
cortisol excess resulting in long-term metabolic and cardiovascular consequences.
The identification of metabolic alterations related to hypercortisolism could be
beneficial in tailoring treatments of co-morbidities. Our aim was to characterize
the metabolic alterations of patients with hypercortisolism by targeted plasma
metabolomic profiling.
Methods
Subjects (nZ149) were recruited from three German centers (Munich, Berlin, and
Wurzburg) belonging to the German Cushing registry (CUSTODES) and the
European Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumors (ENSAT). According to
clinical and hormonal characteristics, four groups were identified: non-secreting
adrenocortical  adenomas
(NS)
(nZ27),  subclinical  hypercortisolism
(SH)
(nZ34), CS (nZ46), and patients in whom CS has been excluded (EC) (nZ42).
Plasma  targeted  metabolomics  profiling  was  performed  using  the  mass
spectrometry-based kit AbsoluteIDQ-p180 (BIOCRATES AG, Austria).
Results
Metabolic profile of patients with CS was characterized by reduced carnitine and
acetyl-carnitine levels, with respect to EC. Polyamine levels were increased in CS
patients,  whereas  several  glucogenic  amino  acids  were  decreased,  when
compared  to  EC.  Similar  alterations  were  also  identified  in  SH  patients.
Spermidine was progressively increased among NS, SH, and CS patients, and
showed  positive  correlation  with  post-DST  cortisol
(CoefficientZ0.341,
P!0.001). Serotonin levels were increased in adrenal-dependent hypercortiso-
lism (SH and CS), when compared to EC, NS, and ACTH-dependent CS. Logistic
regression analysis showed that the panel of significant metabolites among groups
was able to correctly classify 83.8% of the patients. Three scores were identified
from logistic regression that showed good accuracy in discriminating CS vs. EC,
CS vs SH, and SH vs NS (sensitivity/specificity of 87%/83%, 89%/88%, and
78%/74%, respectively).
Conclusion
Metabolomic profiling revealed the presence of several disturbances in patients
with hypercortisolism, mainly involving polyamine and amino acids metabolism,
and b-oxidation. Metabolomic analysis showed also good accuracy in classifying
patients with hypercortisolism according to their specific metabolic profile.
Further studies are currently ongoing to analyze a large cohort of matched normal
control subjects.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP29
GP30
Hair Cortisol Measurements in the Evaluation of Cushing’s Syndrome
Mihail Zilbermint1,2, Aaron Hodes1, Ninet Sinaii3, Elena Belyavskaya1,
Charalampos Lyssikatos1, Jerrold Meyer4, Maya Lodish1 &
Constantine Stratakis1
1Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, USA;2Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA;3Biostatistics and Clinical
Epidemiology Service, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, Maryland, USA;4Department of Psychology, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA.
Context
Hair cortisol has been recently studied to determine evidence of hypercortiso-
lemia  in  humans.  This  test  may  be  valuable  in  estimating  cortisol  levels,
particularly in patients with cyclical Cushing’s syndrome (CS).
Objective
To determine correlations with biochemical evidence of CS, and to compare hair
cortisol measurements in patients with CS to normative data.
Methods
Hair samples from 49 study subjects were collected (30 with CS (mean age:
25.9G18.2 years) and 19 without CS (mean age: 39.0G19.4 years)). Three hair
samples from each patient were processed and analyzed for cortisol according to
the methods described by Meyer et al 2014. Diurnal serum cortisol and ACTH
measurements,
24-h-urinary  free  cortisol  corrected  by  body  surface  area
(UFC/BSA) and 17-hydroxysteroids, corrected for creatinine (17OHS/Cr), were
pre-operatively assessed. Average hair cortisol data were log-transformed for
normality and compared to normal data of healthy adults as measured in the same
laboratory.
Results
Average hair cortisol values in the groups with CS and without CS were 46.2G
64.9 pg cortisol/mg hair
(median:
24.6 pg/mg; range:
3.1-406.3 pg/mg) and
125.7G455.2 pg  cortisol/mg  hair
(median:
18.0 pg/mg;  range:
1.9-
2745.6 pg/mg), respectively. In the CS group, hair cortisol was positively and
moderately correlated with UFC/BSA (rZ0.31, P!0.001). Mean hair cortisol
levels in CS patients were significantly different from patients without CS
(PZ0.02) but not statistically significantly different from the mean level of
22.0G59.0 pg/mg in a cohort of healthy individuals (PZ0.07 and PZ0.12,
respectively).
Discussion
We found that hair cortisol levels correlated with some biochemical tests for CS;
in addition, there was a difference in hair cortisol levels between those with and
those without CS among our cohort at the NIH, yet not among a separate normal
control cohort. We speculate that hair cortisol can assist in the diagnostic workup
for CS. More research is needed on the use of hair cortisol in patients with CS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP30
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Bone & Calcium Homeostasis
GP31
Bone-specific circulating miRNA profile changes over an 8-week
repeated sprint training protocol
Giovanni Lombardi1, Veronica Sansoni1, Silvia Perego1,
Gianluca Vernillo2,3, Mattia Bonzanni4, Giampiero Merati2,5,
Andrea Barbuti4,6, Antonio La Torre2 & Giuseppe Banfi1,7
1I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Milano, Italy;2Department of
Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milano, Milano, Italy;
3University of Verona, CeRiSM, Research Center for Sport, Mountain and
Health, Rovereto, Italy;4Department of Biosciences, University of Milano,
Milano, Italy;5I.R.C.C.S. Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, Milano, Italy;
6Centro Interuniversitario di Medicina Molecolare e Biofisica Applicata
(CIMMBA), University of Milano, Milano, Italy;7Vita-Salute San Raffaele
University, Milano, Italy.
Introduction
Although underlying mechanisms are largely unknown, bone metabolism is
regulated by specific microRNAs and changes in their expression are associated
with metabolic bone disorders. Exercise is a determinant of bone metabolism;
however, different training protocols differently affect bone. Little is known about
the effects of exercise on bone-specific miRNA expression.
We studied the effect of a 8-week high-intensity training protocol on circulating
levels of selected miRNA regulating bone metabolism.
Methods
18 male adults were assigned to one of two groups. One group (nZ9) performed
repeated sprint training (3 times/week, 18 maximal all-out 15 m sprints with 17 s
of passive recovery); the other served as a control group (nZ9). Blood samples
were taken before the start of the protocol (T0) and after 4 (T1) and 8 weeks (T2).
Plasma circulating miRNAs (miR21 5P, miR125b 5P, miR23a 3P, miR93 5P,
miR100 5P) were evaluated by real-time PCR (normalized on miR425 5P);
relative expression levels were calculated by the 2KDDCT method. Changes over
time where tested by repeated measure one-way ANOVA, while inter-group
differences at each time-point were tested throughout t test.
Results
While in the control group the miRNA expression remained stable, in the trained
group miR23a 3P was 1.4-fold downregulated, between T0 and T2 (P!0.05).
miR100 5P was 3-fold downregulated between T0 and T1 (P!0.05) and twofold
downregulated between T0 and T2 (P!0.05). miR125b 5P expression was
twofold downregulated at T1 compared to both T0 (P!0.01) and T2 (P!0.05).
Conclusions
An 8-week long high-intensity training protocol downregulates the expression of
circulating miRNA associated with fracture risk.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP31
GP32
Hormone replacement therapy has favorable effects on bone
microarchitecture, bone mineral density and body fat mass, without
affecting lean mass: the OsteoLaus Cohort
Georgios Papadakis1, Didier Hans2, Peter Vollenweider3, Gerard Waeber3,
Martin Preisig4, Pedro Marques-Vidal3 & Olivier Lamy2,3
1Service of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, CHUV, Lausanne
University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland;2Center of Bone Diseases,
CHUV, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland;3Service of
Internal Medicine, CHUV, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,
Switzerland;4Department of Psychiatry, Psychiatric Epidemiology and
Psychopathology Research Center, Lausanne University Hospital,
Lausanne, Switzerland.
Introduction
Hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) increases bone mineral density (BMD).
Controversy exists regarding residual effect after withdrawal. We aimed to
explore  the  effect  of  HRT  and  HRT  withdrawal  on:  i)  BMD  and  bone
microarchitecture assessed by trabecular bone score (TBS); ii) fat (FMI), lean
(LMI) and appendicular lean (ALMI) mass indexes.
Methods
The OsteoLaus Cohort assessed 1500 women (50-80 years) for BMD, TBS, total
energy expenditure (TEE), alternative health eating index (AHEI) and depression
prevalence.
1094
women  had  body  composition  analysis  by  dual  X-ray
absorptiometry. According to HRT status, women were classified as: Never
(NUZ504), Current (CUZ205) and Past (PUZ262) users.
Results
The three groups differed in age (67.4G6.8, 64.0G6.8, 62.1G8.0 for PU, CU and
NU respectively, P!0.001), AHEI and TEE but not in BMI or depression
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
prevalence. HRT users presented higher age- and BMI-adjusted TBS (CU and PU
versus NU, P!0.001 and PZ0.066 respectively) and BMD at lumbar spine (LS)
and total hip (TH) (CU and PU versus NU, P!0.05). TBS was negatively
associated with age and BMI-adjusted slopes for 10-year increment were K0.051
(K0.060; K0.041), K0.032 (K0.048; K0.017) and K0.022 (K0.038; K0.005)
(NU, PU and CU respectively, P!0.05). Slopes of LS and TH BMD showed
similar  pattern
(NU!PU!CU,  P!0.015).  After  multiple  adjustments,  no
difference existed between the 3 groups for LMI and ALMI. Slopes for 10-year
increment of FMI were 0.887 (0.566; 1.208), 0.084 (K0.463; 0.631) and 0.225
(K0.350; 0.800) for NU, PU and CU respectively (CU or PU versus NU,
P!0.05).
Conclusion
Current HRT use is associated with higher BMD values and better preservation of
TBS. The benefits of HRT seem to persist in PU. HRT has no effect on lean mass.
However, the age-associated gain of FMI is reduced in HRT users. Further
analysis is ongoing to assess whether it concerns subcutaneous or visceral fat.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP32
GP33
Relationships between lower-limb muscle strength and tibial outcomes
in ageing UK men
Ayse Zengin1, Stephen R Pye2, Michael J Cook2, Judith E Adams3,
Frederick C W Wu4, Terence W O’Neill2,5 & Kate A Ward1,6
1MRC Human Nutrition Research, Cambridge, UK;2Faculty of Medical and
Human Sciences, Arthritis Research UK Centre for Epidemiology, Institute
of Inflammation and Repair, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK;3Radiology and Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre (MAHSC), Manchester Royal Infirmary,
Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK;4Andrology Research Unit,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre (MAHSC), The University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK;5NIHR Manchester Musculoskeletal
Biomedical Research Unit, Central Manchester NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK;
6MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK.
Ageing is associated with sarcopenia, osteoporosis and an increased risk of
falling, which together contribute to increased fracture risk. There are few data
describing the associations between functional measures of muscle and bone
during ageing. Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine in ageing men
associations between measures of lower-limb muscle strength and age and then to
investigate the relationships with tibial bone outcomes.
Men (nZ301) aged 40-85 years were recruited in the UK (201-White, 43-Black,
57-South-Asian). pQCT outcomes from the 38% tibia were: cortical bone mineral
content (Ct.BMC), cross-sectional area (CSA), and cross-sectional moment of
inertia (CSMI). Jumping mechanography assessed muscle force (kN) and power
(kW) from a single 2-leg counter-jump. Linear regression was used to describe the
relationships between: power/force and age with an ethnicity*age interaction; and
force and bone outcomes; all were adjusted for weight and height. Results are
expressed as b-coefficients (95%CI) of percentage unit change in age/force.
There were significant negative relationships between muscle power and age in all
groups
(P!0.001):  White  (K1.9%  (K2.1,  K1.7)),  Black  (K1.3%  (K1.8,
K0.8)) and South-Asian (K1.8% (K2.3, K1.3)), with a significant difference
between the slopes of White and Black men (PZ0.03). There was a significant
negative relationship between force and age in White (K3.9% (K0.6, K0.20);
P!0.0001) and South-Asian (K4.2% (K0.8, K0.08); PZ0.017) but not Black
men (K3.0% (K0.7, 0.8); PZ0.121). Muscle force and bone outcomes were
positively associated: Ct.BMC 8.5% (3.6, 13.4); CSA 9.3% (5.4, 13.2) and CSMI
18.6% (11.1, 26.2), all P!0.001; there were no ethnic differences in these
relationships (with an additional age-adjustment).
The relationship between power and age was different between ethnicities which
may lead to differences in fall risk. Muscle force positively predicted bone
outcomes  in  ageing  men.  Together,  these  findings  may  contribute  to  the
understanding of fracture incidence in different ethnic groups.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP33
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
GP34
Impact of Laboratory assays on the diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism
Hans G Schneider1,2, Joel Smith1, Cherie Chiang1, Dulani Kottachachchi1,
Shantanu Joglekar1 & Chris Bain1
1Alfred Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;2Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
Abstract withdrawn
GP35
Retrospective analysis of bone metabolism in patients waiting for
simultaneous pancreas kidney transplantation
Simona Kratochvílová, Martina Zahradnická & Jana Brunová
Diabetes Centre, Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague,
Czech Republic.
Objective
Osteoporosis is a typical long-term complication after solid organ transplantation.
Patients after simultaneous pancreas kidney transplantation (SPK) are at a very
high risk due to preceding renal osteopathy and diabetic status. To determine the
best preventive strategy we analysed the bone metabolism at the point of the
pretransplant examination.
Design and methods
In years 2011-2014 the number of 112 patients with type 1 diabetes (69 men, 43
women) entered the waiting list for the SPK for the first time. The mean age was
40.71G10.44 years, duration of diabetes 24.69G7.98 years. The hemodialysis or
peritoneal dialysis was alredy established in 40 patients, 72 patients had renal
impairement in stage CKD 3-4. We analysed biochemical results and the bone
densitometry from their pretransplant investigation.
Results
The mean serum total calcium level was 2.23G0.16 mmol/l, phosphorus 1.67G
0.36 mmol/l and intact parathormone 19.05G13.32 pmol/l. The mean 25-hydro-
xycholecalciferol level was
15.39G7.67 mg/l; 24% patients had vitamine D
deficiency. The average lumbal spine T score was K0.94G1.38 with significantly
worse results in men than women (K1.19G1.23 vs K0.54G1.46; PZ0.015).
The average proximal femur T score was K1.39G1.12; comparable between
men  and  women  but  significantly  worse  than  lumbal  spine
(P!0.001).
Osteoporosis was diagnosed in 22.5% and osteopenia in 50.5% patients, only
27% had normal bone density. The incidence of osteoporosis and osteopenia was
similar between men and women.
Conclusions
Patients with type 1 diabetes in CKD 3-5 suffer from serious bone mineral density
impairment despite their young age. On contrast to population data the incidence
of low bone density is the same among men and women. Bone metabolism should
be monitored since early stages of diabetic nephropathy and adequate preventive
measures should be introduced.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP35
GP36
Fontan palliation in children is associated with bone deficits
Anna Petryk1, Lynda E Polgreen2, Roland Brown1, Bradley S Marino3,
David Gremmels4, Charles Shepard4, Aaron S Kelly1, Bradley S Miller1,
Kyle Rudser1 & Lazaros K Kochilas5
1University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA;2LA BioMed at
Harbor-UCLA, Torrance, California, USA;3Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA;4The Children’s Heart Clinic at Children’s
Hospitals and Clinics of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA;5Emory
University and Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
Background
Survivors with Fontan circulation suffer from chronic systemic hypoperfusion
resulting  in  end-organ  injury.  Little  is  known  about  the  effects  of  these
hemodynamic perturbations on bone. We hypothesized that chronic Fontan
circulation (O5 years after surgery) would be associated with bone deficits.
Methods
Peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT) was performed on 10
Fontan patients (seven males, 11.8G1.7 years) and 11 healthy controls (nine
males, 12.0G1.5 years) with Tanner stage %3. Height-adjusted Bone Mineral
Density Z-scores for lumbar spine (LBMD) and total body less head (TBLH) were
also measured in Fontan patients by dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA).
Linear regression was used to compare radius pQCT measures of bone strength
index (BSI), trabecular
(3% site) and cortical
(33% site) volumetric BMD
(vBMD) and thickness between Fontan patients and controls (with adjustment for
radius length, age, and sex), and to correlate pQCT outcomes with DXA Z-scores.
Results
The adjusted differences in means (95% CI) for Fontan patients vs. controls were:
K28.1 mg/cm3 (K54.8, K1.34; PZ0.040) for trabecular vBMD, K10.9 mg/cm3
(K49.8,
28.0;  PZ0.584)  for  cortical  vBMD,  K0.35 mm
(K0.64,  K0.06,
PZ0.017) for cortical thickness, and K7.2 mg2/mm4 (K13.7, K0.8; PZ0.028)
for BSI. Mean height-adjusted LBMD Z-score was K0.46G1.1 and TBLH
Z-score  was  K0.63G1.1.  LBMD  Z-scores  were  trending  higher  by
0.39
(K0.006, 0.78; PZ0.054) per 20 mg/cm3  of trabecular vBMD among Fontan
subjects.
Conclusions
Children with Fontan palliation have lower trabecular vBMD, cortical thickness,
and bone strength. This suggests that bone is another target organ sensitive to the
Fontan physiology. Among pQCT outcomes, trabecular vBMD showed a similar
trend as LBMD, underscoring a potential utility of DXA as a monitoring tool.
Further studies should evaluate the etiology and impact on fracture risk of these
deficits.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP36
GP37
Trabecular bone score in patients with inflammatory bowel diseases
Anna Krajcovicova, Martin Kuzma, Aristodimos Grigorios Kaniaris,
Zdenko Killinger, Tibor Hlavaty & Juraj Payer
Faculty of Medicine, 5th Department of Internal Medicine, University
Hospital, Commenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Introduction
Osteoporosis is known chronic complication of inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBD). It is known that areal bone mineral density (aBMD) does not sufficiently
reflect bone strength and quality. The trabecular bone score (TBS) provides an
indirect measurement of bone microarchitecture, independent of aBMD.
Aims and methods
The aim was to assess TBS in IBD patients with regard to disease behavior using
in comparison with lumbar spine (LS) BMD. The cohort consisted of 84 IBD
patients,
53 with Crohn’s disease (CD) and 31 with ulcerative colitis (UC).
Clinical  characteristics  i.e.  age,  gender,  anthropometry,  clinical  behaviour,
medication were recorded. The BMD was determined by dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry
(DXA,  Hologic  Discovery)  at  the  lumbar  spine.  TBS  was
determined by TBS Insight software (Medimaps, France).
Results
Cohort mean age was 42G14.2 years with the average disease duration of 11G7
years. 12/84 (14%) of the cohort were postmenopausal women. 39.6% (21/53) of
CD patients had prior resection of the ileum. At the time of assessment 8/84
(9.5%) of the IBD patients (3CD vs 5 UC patients) were on glucocorticoid therapy
with O5 mg equivalent to prednisolone daily. The percentage of patients with
substitution of vitamin D (800IU) and calcium (0.5-1 g) was similar between CD
and UC (24.5% vs 29%), none of the patients were on antiporothic treatment. The
average LS BMD was 0.964G0.113 g/cm2  and TBS 1.36G0.14. Significantly
lower TBS although not LS BMD was found in patients with fistulising CD as
compared to those with luminal disease (PZ0.0039). We did not observe any
difference in TBS or BMD in UC patients according to the disease behaviour.
Conclusion
We observed that spine TBS can identify quality of bone mineral density in
patients with Crohn’s disease better than BMD itself. CD patients with severe
disease are at higher risk of low bone mineral density.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP37
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP38
Influence of prematurity and low birth weight on peak bone mass
Chandima Balasuriya1,2, Mats P Mosti1, Kari Anne I Evensen3,
Ann-Mari Brubakk3, Marit S Indredavik4, Berit Schei5,
Astrid Kamilla Stunes1 & Unni Syversen1,2
1Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway;2Department
of Endocrinology, St Olavs University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway;
3Department of Laboratory Medicine, Childrens’ and Women’s Health,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway;
4Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, St Olavs University
Hospital, Trondheim, Norway;5Department of Gynecology, St Olavs
University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
Introduction
Intrauterine weeks 36-38 with rapid transplacental mineral transfer are crucial for
skeletal development. Prematurity and low birthweight may therefore lead to a
subnormal peak bone mass. We evaluated the influence of gestational age and low
birthweight on bone mineral density (BMD) and content (BMC) in young adults
born preterm with very low birthweight (VLBW) and small for gestational age
(SGA) at term.
Description of methods/design
Altogether, 186 subjects (femalesZ95) 26-28 years of age were included. Of
these, 52 were born preterm with VLBW (!1500 g), 56 born SGA at term
(!10th percentile) and 75 controls born at term with normal birthweight (O10th
percentile).  Weight,  height,  previous  fractures,  smoking,  physical  activity,
calcium and vitamin D intake were recorded. BMC and BMD at spine, femoral
neck, hip and whole body and spine trabecular bone score (TBS) were measured
by DXA. Serum bone markers were analyzed.
Results
The VLBW and SGA groups were significantly shorter compared to controls. The
VLBW group was more physically inactive and reported higher calcium intake.
Previous fractures, smoking and vitamin D were similar between the groups. The
VLBW  group  exhibited  significantly  lower  BMC  and  BMD  at  most  sites
measured, also controlled for known confounders. Femoral neck BMD was 6.7%
lower in VLBW. BMD was apparently dependent on gestational age, as each
additional week of gestation resulted in 0.037 units increase in femoral neck
Z-score. The SGA group displayed lower BMC at spine and lower whole body
Z-score. No differences were observed in TBS or bone markers, except for higher
Dkk1 in the VLBW groups.
Conclusion
Adults born premature with VLBW and SGA at term displayed significantly
shorter height, and lower BMC and BMD compared to controls. The lower peak
bone mass may imply an increased fracture risk in the future.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP38
GP39
Drug holiday in osteoporosis. reducing side effects of long lasting
treatments
Panagiotis Athanassiou1, Eleni Pantazi2, Ourania Skioti2,
Aikaterini Tzanavari1 & Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou3
1Department of Rheumatology, St Paul’s Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;
2Department of Endocrinology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens, Greece;
3Department of Endocrinology, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Osteoporosis is a chronic and dangerous disease, as it may be silent and may
express itself with a sudden catastrophic event, such as a fracture. Treatment of
osteoporosis demands the use of potent pharmaceutical agents with long lasting
effects. In particular, bisphosphonates, such as ibandronate, may be used. It has
become evident that chronic treatment with anti-osteoporotic agents may reverse
the course of the disease, patients having normal bone mineral density or only
osteopenia following treatment. In such a group of patients treatment may be
interrupted and patients followed up.
Aim
The aim was to describe drug holiday in a group of patients with osteoporosis,
having received treatment with ibandronate.
Methods
Within a group of 120 patients (108 female, 12 male) with osteoporosis, 20
patients (female) were receiving ibandronate 150 mg once monthly and calcium
with cholecalciferol for a period of 1.8-3 years. These patients had osteoporosis
on ibandronate initiation, T score ranging from K2.5 to K3.4.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
On reevaluation after treatment with ibandronate 150 mg once monthly and
calcium with cholecalciferol, bone mineral density was measured. Osteopenia
was observed in 12 female patients and normal bone mineral density in 8.
Ibandronate was stopped, while treatment with calcium and cholecalciferol was
continued. Patients were reevaluated after 1 and 2 years. Within this group 11
patients continued to have osteopenia, while one patient was found to have
osteoporosis and he required the addition of another antiosteoporotic medication.
Within the group of eight patients with normal bone mineral density 6 continued
to have normal bone mineral density and two were had osteopenia.
Conclusions
Treatment with antiosteoporotic agents, especially bisphosphonates appears to
have beneficial and long-lasting effects in some patients, enabling treatment
interruption and absence of recurrence. Drug holiday seems to be possible in a
significant group of osteoporosis patients, being associated with absence of
recurrence. It appears that osteoporosis treatment should be individualized, as
genetic factors may be associated with very good response in some of our
osteoporosis patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP39
GP40
Severe osteomalacia caused by a phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor
secreting fibroblast growth factor 23: a case report
Lisa Ravarani1, Michael Faust1, Alexander Quaas4, Marc Bludau2,
Matthias Schmidt3, Inka Allendorf1, Tengu Topuzoglu-Muller1,
Ruth Hanßen1, Oliver Schary5 & Jens C Bruning1
1Poliklinik fur Endokrinologie, Diabetologie und Präventivmedizin.
Uniklinik Koln, Koln, Germany;2Klinik und Poliklinik fur Allgemein-,
Vizeral- und Tumorchirurgie. Uniklinik Koln, Koln, Germany;3Klinik und
Poliklinik fur Nuklearmedizin. Uniklinik Koln, Koln, Germany;4Institut fur
Pathologie. Uniklinik Koln, Koln, Germany;5Klinik II fur Innere Medizin;
Nephrologie, Rheumatologie, Diabetologie und allgemeine Innere Medizin.
Uniklinik Koln, Koln, Germany.
Tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO) is a rare acquired paraneoplastic syndrome
clinically presenting  with recurring fractures,  muscular weakness  and pain.
Laboratory values of affected patients are characterized by renal phosphate
wasting and hypophosphatemia caused by an overexpression of fibroblast growth
factor
23
(FGF- 23), a hormone belonging  to the group  of phosphatonins
regulating phosphate and vitamin D homeostasis. Pathologically, it is secreted
especially by small (and thus difficult to locate) mesenchymal tumors, leading to a
significant delay from onset of (often debilitating) symptoms to diagnosis. TIO
was first described in 1947 and so far only approximately 300 cases have been
reported in the literature.
We present the case of a 41-year old female patient with a 4-year history of
recurring fractures of the metatarsal bones and growing muscle pain of the
extremities leading to a markedly decreased physical activity. The detailed
workup  showed  reproducible  low  levels  of  serum  phosphate  and  1,25-OH
Vitamin D and an increased fractional excretion of urine phosphate. FGF-23 was
increased
20-fold
(Ref.:
110 kRU/l,  measured  value
2100 kRU/l).  In  the
subsequently performed imaging diagnostics
(ultrasound, DOTATATE-PET-
CT) a 2!2!1 cm tumor was located on the left pubic bone. The patient
underwent surgery and in the histopathological work-up a benign mesenchymal
tumor was confirmed. After complete excision, the serum and urine phosphate
normalized rapidly, FGF-23 levels were tested 2 weeks after surgery and had
decreased to normal (35 kRU/l). Accordingly, the patient’s symptoms greatly
improved shortly after surgery and completely resolved over the course of
6 months. So far, there is no sign of tumor recurrence during a 6-month period of
follow-up.
Our aim of presenting this case report is to increase awareness that any patient
with hypophosphatemia, unexplained recurrent fractures and muscle weakness
should undergo workup for TIO as this remains an extremely rare but potentially
curable disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP40
GP41
A serum 25 hydroxy-vitamin D concentration in search of a bone disease
Sonali Shah1, Cherie Chiang1, Ken Sikaris2, Zhong Lu2 & Ego Seeman1,3
1Departments Endocrinology and Medicine, Austin Health, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia;2Melbourne Pathology, Melbourne, VIC, Australia;
3University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Vitamin D insufficiency and deficiency are defined as a serum 25-hydroxy-
vitamin  D  (25(OH)D)  below  50  and  30 nmol/l  respectively.  We  aimed  to
determine whether there is a serum 25(OH)D that signals a low serum calcium
and phosphate, secondary hyperparathyroidism, high bone remodelling, low area
bone mineral density (aBMD), and so, an increased risk for microstructural
deterioration and bone fragility.
Method
Concentrations of
25(OH)D, calcium, phosphate, creatinine and parathyroid
hormone (PTH) were measured by Melbourne Pathology in serum from 11,855
subjects (8777 women, 3078 men). We measured serum C-terminal telopeptide of
type 1 collagen (CTX), Procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide (P1NP) and
aBMD at the spine and hip in 182 subjects from Austin Health. We excluded
persons !20 years, patients with hypercalcaemia, chronic kidney disease and a
serum 25(OH)D R180 nmol/l.
Results
Serum calcium and phosphate correlated positively with serum 25(OH)D. Serum
PTH and alkaline phosphatase, but not CTX and P1NP, correlated negatively with
serum 25(OH)D. There was no detectable association between serum 25(OH)D
and aBMD and no level of 25(OH)D that identified persons with low serum
calcium or phosphate, or high PTH or remodelling markers. Among 1439 subjects
with 25(OH)D !30 nmol/l, 6.1% had a low serum calcium, 3.4% had a low
serum phosphate, 6.1% had a high alkaline phosphatase, and 34.2% had an
elevated PTH.
Conclusion
The sample size of subjects with 25(OH)D below 30 nmol/l may have limited the
power to detect associations, but within this constraint and the cross sectional
nature of this study, we infer that diagnosing persons as having vitamin D
‘deficiency’ or ‘insufficiency’ based on the current criteria is not evidence based.
A diagnostic threshold level of serum 25(OH)D predisposing to bone disease, and
the duration of exposure at this level, remain uncertain.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP41
GP42
Hypercalcemia in patients with lymphoma
Agustina Pia Marengo1, Fernando Guerrero Pérez1, Santiago Mercadal
Vilchez2, Eva María González Barca2, Inmaculada Peiró Martinez2 &
Carles Villabona Artero1
1Hospital Universitari Bellvitge - IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain;2Institut
Catala d’Óncologia, Hospital Duran I Reynals, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction
Calcitriol-mediated hypercalcemia is one of the most common paraneoplastic
syndromes associated with lymphoma.
Aim
Evaluate clinical and biochemical manifestations as well on the management of
hypercalcemia in patients with lymphoma.
Materials and methods
Prospective analysis of patients with lymphoma who developed hypercalcemia
during September-2011 and January-2016.
Results
Two hundred and six patients with high-grade lymphoma were reported, 189 with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and 17 with adult Tcell leukemia/
lymphoma (ATLL). Hypercalcemia was documented in 15 patients (incidence of
7.28%) of whom 13 were DLBCL and two ATLL, mostly with stage IV disease.
Median age was 60 years (range 36-85); 53.3% women. Up to one-third of the
cases, symptoms of hypercalcemia were reported, predominantly those involving
neurological manifestations (somnolence, delirium) and polyuria. Mean calcium
was 3.1 mmol/lG0.4 (range 2.6-4.2) and phosphatemia 1.1 mmol/lG0.4 (range
0.7-1.5).  Median  concentration  of  serum  calcidiol  and  calcitriol  was
51.1 nmol/lG24.6 (range 14-95, reference value above 50) and 160 pmol/lG
99
(range
6-342,  reference  value
39-193),  respectively.  Calcitriol  was
determined in 86.6% patients, only a quarter presented levels above de limit
range. Serum PTH was suppressed in 13/15 patients. PTH-rp was determined in
13/15 cases; elevated serum levels were found only in one patient with supressed
PTH. Eighty percent patients were treated with chemotherapy; the rest of them
could not begin treatment due to impaired performance status. Slightly more than
half  of  them  received  specific  treatment  for  hypercalcemia  previous  to
chemotherapy (66.6% hydration, 40% furosemide, 40% corticosteroids, 20%
bisphosphonates). Calcium was normalized in 93.3% of patients, in relation to
response to chemotherapy, with a mean value of 2.3 mmol/lG0.18, 18G15 days
after starting treatment.
Conclusion
Hypercalcemia associated with lymphoma is a relatively common disorder. In our
series, the classic pattern mediated by calcitriol was observed only in 25% of the
patients; most of them had multifactorial pathogenesis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP42
GP43
Evaluation of preoperative ultrasonographic and biochemical features
of patients with aggressive parathyroid disease: Is there any reliable
predictive marker?
Bekir Cakir1, Sefika Burcak Polat1, Mehmet Kilic2, Didem Ozdemir1,
Cevdet Aydin1, Nuran Sungu3 & Reyhan Ersoy1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara, Turkey;
2Department of General Surgery, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,
Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara, Turkey;3Department of Pathology,
Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Yildirim Beyazit University,
Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Parathyroid cancer (PC) is rare accounting for !1% of all presentations. Tumors
that demonstrate these atypical features and do not fulfill criteria for carcinoma
can be classified as atypical adenomas (APA). Herein we aimed to evaluate the
clinical and biochemical features of the patients with an atypical parathyroid
adenoma or carcinoma and compare it with benign parathyroid adenomas.
Method
Twenty-eight patients who were operated for primary hyperparathyroidism and
diagnosed with APA or PC were enrolled. Another 102 patients with classical PA
were included as the control group. Classic adenomas, APAs and PCs were
compared  according  to  preoperative  biochemical  and  ultrasonographic
parameters.
Results
Serum Calcium (Ca) was significantly higher in the carcinoma group compared to
APA and classical PA groups in post hoc analysis, (P!0.001 and PZ0.010,
respectively). Serum median parathormone (PTH) was significantly higher in the
APA and the carcinoma groups compared to classical PA group (P!0.05). Serum
(alkaline phosphatase) ALP and 24-h urinary Ca excretion were significantly
higher in the APA and PC groups compared to classical adenomas (P!0.001).
Areas under ROC curve for Ca, PTH, ALP, 24 h Ca excretion and the adenoma
diameter were significant for discrimination of aggressive (APA and PC) from
benign disease. Best cut off for Ca, PTH, ALP, 24 h Ca excretion and the adenoma
diameter  were
12.45 mg/dl,
265.05 pg/ml,
154.5 IU/l,
348.5 mg/day  and
21.5 mm,  respectively.  Multivariate  analysis  showed  that  Ca,  ALP  and
isoechoic/cystic appearance were independent predictors for aggressive disease
Conclusion
Preoperatively high PTH, ALP and urinary Ca levels and large lesions with
isoechoic or cystic appearance may be predictive for atypical adenoma or
carcinoma that may requiring more extensive surgery and closer follow up to
prevent any lifelong complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP43
GP44
Diabetes mellitus and carbohydrate metabolism in primary
hyperparathyroidism
Natalya Mokrysheva, Svetlana Mirnaya & Anna Lipatenkova
Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Primary  hyperparathyroidism
(PHPT)  results  in  alterations  in  carbohydrate
metabolism, characterized by insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, and glucose
intolerance.
Objective
The aim of our study was to evaluate carbohydrate metabolism status in patients
with PHPT.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
One hundred and nine patients with PHPT were investigated, healthy controls
included 36 individuals matched by sex age and BMI (BMIZ27G5 kg/m2).
Blood tests, and 75 g oral glucose tolerance test results were evaluated, HOMA
index was adjusted as immunoreactive insulin*glucose/22.
Results
Eight percent patients had type 2 diabetes mellitus
(DM), impaired fasting
glycemia was observed in 3% and glucose intolerance in 12% of patients with
PHPT. Basal glucose level, plasma immunoreactive insulin (IRI) and HOMA
index did not differ between groups with mild and severe forms of the disease
(PZ0.43). Postprandial glucose increased in patients with severe compared to
mild form (P!0.06). Thus glucose level was significantly raising in accordance
with  the  PTH  level  elevation
(HZ8.2;  PZ0.04).  Postprandial  insulin  was
significantly increased in patients with severe form (P!0.01), we did not find any
correlations with PTH level but with ionized serum calcium (rZ0.3; PZ0.006).
The relative risk of type 2 DM in patients with severe PHPT (8.5%) raised by 2.3
times (CI 95% 0.3; 1.8) and is higher than in patients with the mild form (3.7%),
which are comparable with control group.
Conclusions
Our work shows that patients with PHPT feature disturbances in carbohydrate
metabolism. The incidence and prevalence of type 2 DM is significantly increased
in group with severe form PHPT. These results argue for improved screening to
identify carbohydrate metabolism status in patients with PHPT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP44
GP45
Differencial diagnosis of increased serum parathyroid hormone: the
importance of vitamin D deficiency/insufficiency
MGloria Baena-Nieto, Lourdes García-García-Doncel,
Rosa Márquez-Pardo, Manuel Cayón-Blanco, Rosario López-Velasco
& Isabel Torres-Barea
Jerez Hospital, Jerez, Cádiz, Spain.
Introduction
Vitamin D insufficiency is very common among Spanish adults. It is well
established there is an inverse relationship between vitamin D and PTH levels.
The  diagnostic  approach  of  an  increased  serum  PTH  concentration  in  a
normocalcemic normophosphatemic patient is frequent in routine practice and
the deficiency of vitamin D is the major cause of secondary hyperparathyroidism
(SHPT). The aims of this study were to evaluate the prevalence of SHPT in a
cohort  of  normocalcemic  patients  with  elevated  serum  PTH  levels  and
deficiency/insufficiency of vitamin D and to analyze the correlation between
PTH and vitamin D levels.
Methods
Fifty-one patients with elevated PTH levels and a 25OHD !30 ng/ml were
included. All patients were treated with vitamin D for 3-6 months and all
parameters were re-evaluated. Patients with diabetes and chronic kidney disease
were excluded.
Results
Fifty-one patients were included (60.8% female; 62.24G14.28 median age).
Baseline  characteristics  were:  Serum  calcium:
9.766G0.84 mg/dl,  serum
phosphate:
2.81G0.79 mg/dl,  calciuria:
84.59G110 mg/dl  per
24 h,  PTH:
112.28G35 and 25(OH) vitamin D: 16.21G5.3 ng/dl. After treatment with
vitamin D there was a significant increase of 25(OH) vitamin D levels (38.47G
24,  P!0.0001)  and  a  significant  decrease  of  PTH  levels
(88.02G36.09
P!0.001),  serum  calcium  (9.8G0.6  P!0.037),  serum  phosphorus  (3.11G
0.598
P!0.018)  and calciuria
(119.37G110.12 mg/24 h;  P!0.032).  Five
patients were diagnosed of primary hyperparathyroidism (9.8%) and two patients
(3.92%) of normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism. Plasma 25(OH)D3
levels correlated negatively with PTH levels (rZK0.465 (P!0.01).
Conclusions
Vitamin D deficiency/insufficiency is the major cause of SHPT. To adequately
assess this condition is critical to replenish levels of vitamin D. PTH levels
correlate negatively with levels of vitamin D.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP45
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP46
Denosumab increases bone mineral density in primary
hyperparathyroidism treated with cinacalcet
Concepción Mun˜ oz Jiménez, José Manuel Quesada Gómez, Paloma Moreno
Moreno, María Rosa Alhambra Expósito, María Inmaculada Prior Sánchez
& María Ángeles Gálvez Moreno
Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba/Andalucía, Spain.
Cinacalcet decreases and normalizes serum calcium levels across a broad severity
range of primary  hyperparathyroidism
(PHPT), slightly reduces parathyroid
hormone levels which generally remains elevated, whereas it has no effect on bone
mineral density (BMD). Therefore, when administering cinacalcet to a patient with
PHPT, concomitant treatment with an anti-catabolic drug should be considered.
An open-labeled, prospective trial was conducted in 32 patients with PHPT with
cinacalcet treatment (contraindications to surgery, negative parathyroid imaging,
persistent or relapsing PHPT after PTx- and refusal of PTx), to determine whether
denosumab, maintains or improves BMD in patients with PHPT after 24 months of
treatment.
PHPT patients with low BMD were treated with cinacalcet (Mimpara, Amgen;
titrated dose),
25-OH vitamin D (Hidroferol, Faes) and denosumab (Prolia,
Amgen) 60 mg sc injections given every 6 months. Serum calcium, phosphorous
PTH and bone turnover markers were evaluates every 3 and 6 months. BMD was
measured at the lumbar spine (LS) and total femur (TF) by dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry baseline and after 24 months of treatment.
The treatment normalized calcium decreasing 1.7G0.1 mg/dl (P!0,0001) and
paratohormone 33.36G21.6 (P!0,05) pg/dl. Bone turnover markers remained
suppressed for the duration of the trial. The treatment was also associated with a
significant increase after 24 months in vs baseline in LS BMD: 8% (P: 0.037) and in
TF BMD: 7% (P: 0.0001), improving to normal BMD in the 45.5%.
Denosumab associated to cinacalcet is an excellent therapeutic option to normalize
serum calcium and paratohormone to treat the metabolic bone-disease in patients
with PHPT who do not meet criteria for surgical treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP46
GP47
Determination of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D status, serum CrossLaps, and
calcium intake in individuals with primary adult-type lactose
malabsorption
Dietmar Enko1, Gernot Kriegshauser1, Robert Stolba1, Harald Mangge2,
Thomas Forstner3 & Gabriele Halwachs-Baumann1
1Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, General Hospital
Steyr, Steyr, Austria;2Clinical Institute of Medical and Laboratory
Diagnostics, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria;3Department of
Applied Systems Research and Statistics, Johannes Kepler University Linz,
Linz, Austria.
Introduction
Primary adult-type lactose malabsorption (PALM) is a widespread inherited
autosomal recessive condition. It is considered to be associated with osteoporosis.
The purpose of the present study was to assess the 25-hydroxy-vitamin D
(25[OH]D) status, serum CrossLaps and dairy calcium intake in individuals with
PALM (i.e., LCT C/CK13910 genotype) and normal controls (i.e., LCT C/T-13910
and T/TK13910 genotypes). In addition, the height, weight and body mass index
(BMI) were determined.
Methods
In total, 210 adult individuals, who were referred to our outpatient clinic for PALM
testing, were included in this prospective cross-sectional study. All participants
underwent  genotyping  for  the  LCT  C/T-13910
polymorphism,  25(OH)D  and
CrossLaps measurements and clinical examinations. Blood sampling was
performed after a 12 h overnight fasting in the morning between 8:00 and
10:00 h. A self-developed questionnaire was used to estimate daily calcium intake
from dairy products.
Results
Fifty-five individuals with PALM (i.e., LCT C/CK13910  homozygotes) showed
significantly lower
25(OH)D  (mean:
24.95G10.04
vs
28.59G9.56 ng/ml,
PZ0.018) and higher CrossLaps serum levels (mean: 0.46G0.31 vs 0.43G
0.49 ng/ml, PZ0.251) compared to 155 normal controls (i.e., LCT C/T-13910
hetero- or T/TK13910 homozygotes). Moreover, 26/55 (47.27%) LCT C/C-13910
homozygotes reported to be lactose intolerant compared to 31/155 (20.0%)
normal controls (P!0.001). Total dairy calcium intake (mean: 303G162 vs
330G194 mg/day, PZ0.463) and anthropometric data were similar between
PALM probands and controls.
Conclusion
In conclusion, individuals with PALM were found to have significantly lower
25(OH)D and higher CrossLaps serum levels compared to individuals with
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
lactase-persistence. Based on these findings, we suggest to perform routine
25(OH)D and CrossLaps serum measurements in individuals with PALM. The
determination of these biomarkers may contribute to the preservation of life-long
bone health.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP47
GP48
Serum sclerostin levels are significantly higher in type 2 diabetes
compared to latent autoimmune diabetes in adults regardeless the
presence of metabolic syndrome
Nicola Napoli1 & Raffaella Buzzetti2
1Università Campus Bio-Medico di Roma, Rome, Italy;2Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
Objective
Sclerostin, a circulating Wnt antagonist and a main negative regulator of bone
formation, is increased in type 2 diabetes (T2DM). No data are available on latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) and whether sclerostin is affected by
metabolic syndrome (MS) associated with T2DM or LADA. We evaluated serum
sclerostin and bone turnover markers in LADA and T2DM in relation with MS.
Research design and methods
This cross-sectional study included 98 T2DM and 89 LADA recruited by the
ACTION LADA and NIRAD cohorts, and further divided according to diagnosis
of MS (NCEP criteria). Serum sclerostin, bone formation (P1NP) and bone
resorption (serum beta-CTx) markers were analyzed by ELISA.
Results
Sclerostin was unrelated with age, but increased significantly with BMI (rZ0.29;
P!0.0001) and diabetes duration (rZ0.32, P!0.0001), this parameter (bZ1.77;
PZ0.008)  and  to  a  lesser  extent  triglycerides
(bZ0.03;  PZ0.022)  were
independent predictor of sclerostin levels in the overall population. T2DM
subjects had higher serum sclerostin than LADA overall (median with range 30.7,
1.98-98.8, vs 21.9, 1-74.54 pmol/l, P!0.0001) and also when further subdivided
according to the presence of MS (31.6, 1.98-98.8, vs
22.2,
1-74.5 pmol/l,
PZ0.02). In both T2DM and LADA groups, the presence of MS did not influence
significantly serum sclerostin (PO0.15). Patients with T2DM had lower P1NP
compared to LADA (57.3G16.6 vs 64.2G59.2 pg/ml; PZ0.038) but similar
beta-CTx.
Conclusion
T2DM patients present higher levels of sclerostin than LADA, this could result in
low bone formation. MS or BMI may not play a crucial role.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP48
GP49
Longitudinal changes in maternal 25(OH)D3 and free 25(OH)D,
vitamin D binding protein and the relationship with cord vitamin D
metabolites
Felicity Hey1, Inez Schoenmakers1, Shima Assar1, Sophie E. Moore1,2,
Ann Prentice1,2 & Kerry S. Jones1
1MRC Human Nutrition Research Elsie Widdowson Laboratory,
Cambridge, UK;2MRC Keneba, Keneba, Gambia.
Low  maternal  vitamin  D
(VD)  status  is  associated  with  adverse  fetal
development.  However  gestational  changes  in  VD  metabolites  and  their
relationship with cord concentrations are unclear.
The plasma concentration of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 (25(OH)D3) was measured
using UPLC-MS/MS, and free 25(OH)D and vitamin D binding protein (DBP)
concentrations  were  measured  by  ELISA.  Plasma  samples  were  collected
longitudinally from women resident in rural Gambia with abundant exposure to
UVB (nZ21), before pregnancy, at gestational week 13, 20, 30 and in cord blood.
Data were analysed in Stata/SE 14.0 using mixed effects models and linear
regression.
Concentrations (meanGS.D.) of 25(OH)D3  (64G13, 71G14, 81G22, 100G
23 nmol/l)  and  DBP
(356G47,
488G104,  570G100  and  625G105 mg/l)
increased across gestation (P!0.0001), before pregnancy, at week 13, 20 and
30, respectively. Free 25(OH)D concentration remained unchanged (13.2G3.0,
12.2G2.0, 12.5G2.0, 12.7G3.0 pmol/l) (PZ0.2), measured at the same time-
points. Cord plasma concentrations of 25(OH)D3  (58G15 nmol/l) and DBP
(270G48 mg/l) were lower than maternal plasma at week 30 (P!0.0001), and
free 25(OH)D (15.5G5.0 pmol/l) was higher (PZ0.03).
Maternal (week 30) and cord concentrations were highly correlated for free
25(OH)D (b (95% CI)) (1.38 (0.94, 1.82)) (P!0.0001), but not 25(OH)D3 (0.2
(K0.09, 0.52)) (PZ0.2), suggesting efficient placental transfer of free 25(OH)D.
The slope of the regression of free 25(OH)D on 25(OH)D3 differed between cord,
(0.09
(0.06, 0.11)) and maternal plasma (0.04 (0.02, 0.06)) (P!0.05), suggesting
that free 25(OH)D contributes a higher proportion of total 25(OH)D in cord than
maternal plasma, possibly reflecting relative DBP concentration.
Gestational changes in VD metabolism were apparent; the increasing 25(OH)D3
and DBP concentration was in keeping with the unchanging free 25(OH)D. These
data suggest that mechanisms exist to regulate placental VD transfer and the
availability of free
25(OH)D to the fetal circulation and contribute to our
understanding of maternal and neonatal VD requirements.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP49
GP50
Renal concentration capacity in primary hyperparathyroidism and
changes after surgery and during medical management and monitoring
Svetlana Mirnaya & Natalya Mokrysheva
Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT) run an increased risk of death,
and in some studies cardiovascular diseases were inversely related to urine
osmolality.
Aim
Evaluate the renal concentration capacity in patients with mild and severe pHPT,
and its changes after surgery for pHPT and during medical management and
monitoring.
Materials and methods
The study included 77 patients (median age 57 (52;61)) with pHPT, group
contained patients with mild form (nZ23).
Osmolality index was calculated as urine osmolality to blood osmolality ratio.
Renal concentration capacity impairment was diagnosed with osmolality index
!2. Changes in osmolality index were evaluated in 13 patients after surgery for
pHPT and in 13 patients during medical management and monitoring. Follow-up
period was up to 24 months.
Results
Osmolality index in patients with pHPT was low with median 1.64 (1.36; 2.08).
We found a high prevalence of renal concentration capacity impairment in
patients with pHPT, that was 72%. Both patients with mild and severe pHPT had
similar prevalence. Urine osmolality was Me 0.475 (0.39; 0.588) osm/kg. In
patients  with  renal  concentration  capacity  impairment  PTH  level  was
significantly higher, than in patients with normal urine osmolality (PZ0.039).
Changes in renal concentration capacity in long-term period after surgery for
pHPT were characterized by increase of osmolality index, also in patients with
mild form, (initially 1.75 (1.4; 2.14), after surgery 2.38 (1.84; 2.54)), changing Me
was C12.4% in 6-24 months (PZ0.012).
No  significant  changes  in  osmolality  index  were  observed  during  medical
management and monitoring, the same data found for patients with mild form
pHPT.
Conclusions
Renal concentration capacity impairment is common in mild and severe pHPT.
Renal concentration capacity is restorated after surgery for pHPT. The findings of
this study add cause for measurement of urine osmolality or osmolality index in
all patients with pHPT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP50
Cardiovascular endocrinology
GP51
Pericardial rather than intramyocardial fat is independently associated
with systolic and diastolic left ventricular heart function in
metabolically healthy humans
Peter Wolf1, Yvonne Winhofer1, Sabina Smajis1, Drazenka Jankovic2,
Christian-Heinz Anderwald1, Siegfried Trattnig1, Anton Luger1,
Michael Krebs1 & Martin Krssak1
1University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria;2Wilhelminenspital, Vienna,
Austria.
Background
Obesity is a major risk factor to develop heart failure, in part due to possible
lipotoxic effects of increased intramyocardial (MYCL) and/or pericardial (PERI)
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
lipid accumulation. Recent evidence suggests that MYCL is highly dynamic and
might rather be a surrogate marker for disturbed energy metabolism than the
underlying  cause  of  cardiac  dysfunction.  On  the  other  hand,  PERI  might
contribute  directly  by  mechanic  and  paracrine  effects.  Therefore,  we
hypothesized  that  PERI  rather  than  MYCL  is  associated  with  myocardial
function.
Methods
To avoid potential confounding of metabolic disease 38 metabolically healthy,
but slightly overweight subjects (age: 33G15 years; BMI: 25G4 kg/m2) were
investigated using1H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy and imaging. MYCL and
PERI, as well as systolic and diastolic left ventricular heart function were
assessed.
Results
Correlation  analysis  with  parameters  of  systolic  heart  function  revealed
significant associations for PERI (Ejection fraction: RZ0.404 PZ0.016; Cardiac
index: RZK0.482 PZ0.003), but not for MYCL. With regard to diastolic heart
function MYCL (RZK0.349 PZ0.034) and PERI (RZK0.472 PZ0.004) were
negatively correlated with the E/A ratio. In multiple regression analysis CI and
E/A ratio were negatively predicted by PERI, whereas no impact of MYCL could
be found in direct comparison.
Discussion
Cardiac  fat  depots  impact  heart  function  in  slightly  overweight  subjects.
Moreover, direct comparison of different lipid stores revealed that PERI is a
more important predictor than MYCL for altered systolic and diastolic function in
a metabolically healthy population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP51
GP52
Sex specific effects of alterations in macronutrient composition
on fat accumulation, lipid-synthesis, -transport and -storage
Kirstin Andersen1, Larissa Kavermann1, Amon Horngacher1,
Robby Zachariah Tom2, Stephan Sachs2, Susanna Hofmann2 &
Martin Bidlingmaier1
1Endocrine Research Unit, Med. Clinic and Policlinc IV, University
Hospital Munich, Munich, Germany;2Helmholtz Center Munich, Institute
of Diabetes and Regeneration research, Munich, Germany.
Recent  data  suggest  that  not  only  caloric  density  but  also  macronutrient
composition  of  diets  can  influence  metabolism,  body  composition  and  the
development of metabolic disorders. A limitation of previous studies was that
effects were studied predominantly in males. To better understand potential
differences in the response of males and females to manipulations of dietary
macronutrients, our studies were undertaken in both sexes. As a dietary model, we
used regular chow diet (CH), low carbohydrate-high fat diets of normal (LCHF-1)
and low (LCHF-2) protein content as well as a high carbohydrate-high fat diet
(HCHF). Purified diets (% of metabolizable energy, fat/protein/carbohydrate:
Chow (CH, 16.7/19.0/64.3), protein matched LCHF-1 (78.7/19.1/2.2), ketogenic
LCHF-2  (92.8/5.5/1.7)  and  HCHF
(61.9/18.7/19.4))  were  pair-fed  iso-
energetically for 4 weeks to male and female Wistar rats (12 weeks at start,
nZ7/group). At study end (6 h fasting, dark phase), blood samples and organs
were collected. Compared to CH, all isoenergetically fed diets high in fat led to
reduced body weight (BW) gain. This effect was seen in both sexes and was
independent of carbohydrate content. However, despite lower BW, animals fed
LCHF-1  and  LCHF-2  but  not  HCFC  exhibited  a  significant
(*P!0.05;
***P!0.001) increase in visceral fat (%; g/g BW) in both sexes (male CH:
0.93G0.07, LCHF-1: 1.22G0.07***, LCHF-2: 1.26G0.07***, HCHF: 1.08G
0.06, female CH: 0.65G0.05, LCHF-1: 0.93G0.08, LCHF-2: 1.03G0.09***,
HCHF: 0.64G0.05). Notably, subcutaneous fat mass increased significantly only
in males. Higher serum leptin was seen in all animals fed HF-diets (male CH:
2837G374, LCHF-1: 4094G366, LCHF-2: 4646G617*, HCHF: 4599G411*,
female CH: 904G193, LCHF-1: 2433G434*, LCHF-2: 2355G446*, HCHF:
2157G311). In white adipose tissues (WAT) a pronounced increase in adipokine
mRNA expression (leptin, adiponectin) was seen only in males. Furthermore,
surrogate markers of lipid synthesis (FASN), transport (LPL) and storage (ATGL)
in subcutaneous WAT were also increased only in male individuals on HF. These
data strongly suggest that macronutrients affect lipid metabolism differently in
males and females. If macronutrients also affect transformation of subcutaneous
WAT into beige fat in a sex specific manner is currently under investigation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP52
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP53
Different repletion of intramyocellular lipid (IMCL) in patients with
growth hormone deficiency (GHD) compared to control subjects (CS)
24 h after a 2-h aerobic exercise
Stefan Jenni1, Hannah Loher1, Julie Bucher1, Michael Ith2, Chris Boesch2,
Roland Kreis2 & Emanuel R Christ2
1Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Clinical Nutrition, University
Hospital of Berne, Berne, Switzerland;2Department of Clinical Research,
Division of MR-Spectroscopy and Methodology, University Hospital of
Berne, Berne, Switzerland.
Background
We and others have shown that ectopic lipids are flexible fuel stores in healthy
subjects, in patients with type 1 diabetes or with GHD. IMCL are depleted by
exercise and repleted by diet, whereas intrahepatocellular lipids (IHCL) are
increased immediately after exercise. It is unclear whether the exercise-induced
flexibility of IMCL and IHCL persists until 24 h and whether healthy subjects and
patients with GHD behave differently.
Methods
Male patients with GHD and sedentary CS were included. VO2max was assessed
by  spiroergometry,  visceral  and  subcutaneous  fat  by  whole  body  MRI.
1H-MR-spectroscopy was performed in the M. vastus intermedius (IMCL) and
the liver (IHCL) before and after 2 h of exercise at 50-60% VO2max and 24 h
thereafter, while diet and physical activity were standardized.
Results
14 men (seven GHD and seven CS) were recruited. Mean (GS.D.) age was
46.9G11.7 and 39G12.6 years in GHD and CS, respectively (pZNS). BMI was
26.7G3.8 and 27G4.1 kg/m2 (pZNS), waist circumference 93.3G12.8 cm and
91.3G13.8 cm (pZNS), VO2max  30.5G6.2 and 42.8G10.9 ml/kg per min in
GHD and CS, respectively (PZ0.03). Visceral fat content (of total body mass)
was 4.2G1.4% and 2.4G1.5% (PZ0.04) and subcutaneous fat content was
16.7G3.0% and 15.8G4.0% (pZNS) in GHD and CS.
IMCL were decreased during aerobic exercise in both groups (K11.5G21.9% in
CS and K8.9%G19.1% in GHD) and repleted after 24 h in CS (K5.5G26.6%
compared  to  baseline)  but  not  in  GHD
(K17.9G15.3%), (PZ0.048
for
interaction).  IHCL  increased  immediately  after  exercise  and  decreased  to
baseline after 24 h (pZNS for interaction).
Conclusion
These findings suggest that IMCL’s flexibility differs in patients with GHD 24 h
after exercise whereas the kinetics of IHCL are similar. Apart from lower VO2max
and higher visceral fat in GHD, the lack of lipolytic action of GH could explain
the findings: the reduced fat availability following exercise may have led to a
decreased repletion of IMCL at 24 h.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP53
GP54
Oxytocin signalling involved in cardiac protection against ischemia
reperfusion
Marek Jankowski, Araceli Gonzales Ryes, Ahmed Menouar &
Jolanta Gutkowska
CR-CHUM, University of Montreal, Montreal, Que, Canada.
The  oxytocin
(OT)  treatment  protects  heart  against  ischemia.  Here  we
investigated heart-derived H9c2 cells in simulated ischemia-reperfusion (I-R)
experiments in order to examine the mechanism of OT-induced cardioprotection.
Results
I-R was induced in an anoxic chamber for 2 h and followed by 2 h of reperfusion.
In comparison to normoxia, I-R resulted in decrease of formazan production by
H9c2 cells to 63.5G1.7% (MTT assay) and enhanced apoptosis from 1.7G0.3%
to 2.8G0.4% (Tunel test). Using these assays we found that treatment with OT
(1-500 nM) exerted dose-dependent protection during I-R, especially when OT
was added at the time of reperfusion. This involved OT receptor (OTR) because
the cells exposed to I-R and treated with specific OTR siRNA responded to OT by
enhanced apoptosis. The OT stimulation causes intracellular signaling involving
Pi3K, Akt and eNOS, known as the canonical factors of signalosomes. Confocal
microscopy demonstrated in OT-treated cells, the phosphorylated Akt co-loca-
lized with the mitochondrial marker Cox IV. In addition, the NOS dissociation
from caveolin-3 and eNOS phosphorylation was accompanied by increased
production of NO. The increased cell viability induced by OT was abolished by
the co-treatment of the cells with a PKG inhibitor, KT-5823. Furthermore,
stimulation with OT resulted in enhanced release of atrial natriuretic peptide.
Using the CM-H2DCFDA probe we have also observed the paradox that OT
treatment  stimulates  moderate  levels  of  reactive  oxygen  species
(ROS)
production in cells whereas inhibits excess of ROS produced as a consequence
of ischemia evoked by I-R.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Conclusion
The OTR protected H9c2 cells against I-R, especially if activated at the onset of
reperfusion. The OTR-transduced signals include Akt and PKG. These kinases
translocate to the mitochondria, where they act in a localized signalosome
involving activation of ROS in a positive feedback loop.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP54
GP55
IGF-1: A marker of cardio-metabolic risk in obstructive sleep apnea
(OSA) syndrome?
JL Pépin1, LM Galerneau1, AL Borel2, O Chabre2, M Sapene3, B Stach4,
J Girey-Rannaud5, R Tamisier1 & Ph Caron6
1EFCR et du Sommeil, Grenoble, France;2Service d’Endocrinologie, CHU,
Grenoble, France;3Centre de Pneumologie Rivière, Bordeaux, France;
4Clinique Tessier, Valenciennes, France;5Cabinet de Pneumologie,
Grenoble, France;6Service d’Endocrinologie, CHU Larrey, Toulouse,
France.
Introduction
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-I), the main growth factor associated with GH
secretion, directly opposes endothelial dysfunction and limit early atherosclerosis
by favoring nitric oxide production, promoting insulin sensitivity and preventing
postprandial dyslipidemia. A low serum IGF-I level has been reported in patients
with OSA syndrome and might be one of the mechanisms underlying cardio-
metabolic  risks  in  OSA  patients.  IGF-1
levels  were  evaluated  in  a  large
prospective cohort of patients referred for suspicion of OSA syndrome.
Patients and Methods
In a multicenter national study, 817 patients consulting for suspicion of OSA had
serum IGF-1 measurements and OSA syndrome was confirmed in 567 patients by
polysomnography  or  respiratory  polygraphy.  We  analyzed  the  association
between serum IGF-1 below the median value of the population with variables
related to cardio-metabolic risks, like body mass index (BMI), apnea hypopnea
index (AHI), cholesterol and triglycerides levels (expressed in quartile, median or
continuous variables).
Results
Median IGF-1 median was 138 ng/ml. For the whole population (nZ817) and
after adjustment for age and gender, an IGF-1 below the median was associated
with increased BMI (OR Z2.83; P!0.0001), AHI (OR Z3.03, P!0.0001 for
Quartile 4 vs 1), cholesterol (ORZ1.36, PZ0.0444), and triglycerides (ORZ
1.36; PZ0.0008) levels, respectively. In patients with OSA syndrome (nZ567),
IGF-1 level below the median value was also associated with increased BMI (OR
Z2.03, P!0.0069), AHI (ORZ3.03, P!0.0001 for Quartile 4 vs 1), and
elevated triglyceride levels (ORZ1.29; PZ0.0152).
Conclusion
In patients with OSA syndrome low IGF-1 levels are associated with recognized
predictors of cardio-metabolic risks. So, IGF-1
has potentially a role as a
prognosis biomarker in OSA patients and our results also provide insights
regarding possible mechanisms of co-morbidities in such patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP55
GP56
The dual FXR/TGR5 agonist INT-767 reduces visceral fat mass,
promoting preadipocyte brown differentiation, mitochondrial function
and insulin sensitivity in a rabbit model of high fat diet-induced
metabolic syndrome
Linda Vignozzi1, Ilaria Cellai1, Sandra Filippi2, Paolo Comeglio1,
Tommaso Mello3, Daniele Bani4, Daniele Guasti4, Erica Sarchielli4,
Annamaria Morelli4, Elena Maneschi1, Gabriella Barbara Vannelli4,
Luciano Adorini5 & Mario Maggi1
1Sexual Medicine and Andrology Unit, Department of Experimental and
Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy;
2Interdepartmental Laboratory of Functional and Cellular Pharmacology of
Reproduction, Department of Neuroscience, Drug Research and Child Care,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy;3Gastroenterology Unit, Department
of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy;4Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy;5Intercept Pharmaceuticals,
New York, New York, USA.
Expanding brown adipose tissue is a potential therapeutic strategy to counteract
insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome (MetS). Farnesoid X receptor (FXR)
and Takeda G protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR5) activation enhances insulin
sensitivity, suggesting the capacity of FXR/TGR5 agonists to promote brown
differentiation in adipose tissue. Treatment with increasing doses of the dual
FXR/TGR5 agonist INT-767 (3, 10, 30 mg/Kg bw, daily for 5 days a week, by
oral gavage, for 12 weeks) in a rabbit model of high fat diet (HFD)-induced MetS,
characterized by insulin resistance, hypertension, dyslipidemia,visceral adipose
tissue (VAT) accumulation, dose-dependently reduced VAT mass, as well as
glycemia, insulin resistance, cholesterol levels while significantly increasing
HDL  levels.  INT-767
also  reduced  HFD-induced  hepatomegaly  and  ALT
increase. Treatment with INT-767 decreased HFD-induced adipocyte hyper-
trophy  and  reduced  GLUT4
translocation  to  the  plasma  membrane,  both
considered hallmarks of insulin resistance in VAT. Treatment with INT-767
also induced VAT expression of genes related to nitric oxide (NO)/cGMP/protein
kinase  G  (PKG)  signaling,  mediating  both mitochondriogenesis  and  brown
adipocyte  differentiation.  Rabbit  preadipocytes
(rPADs),  isolated  from  the
different  groups,  were  then  investigated  for  their  spontaneous  adipogenic
potential. The expression of genes specific for: i) brown fat ii) mitochondrial
biogenesis,  iii)  membrane  respiratory  chain,  iv)  pro-fusion  and  pro-fission
proteins of mitochondria, were all significantly increased in rPADs from INT-
767-treated  compared  to  HFD  rabbits.  Transmission  electron  microscopy
demonstrated that INT-767 treatment normalized HFD-induced reduction of
mitochondrial  cristae.  INT-767
treatment  was  also  able  to:  i)  improve
mitochondrial architecture and dynamic, with the majority of mitochondria
continuously moving and changing shape, as assessed by time lapse imaging with
mitochondria-targeted  fluorescent  probe  MitoTracker,  ii)  reduce  superoxide
production,  assessed  by  measuring  the  time-dependent  accumulation  of
dihydroethidium-derived  fluorescence,  iii)  improve  insulin  sensitivity.  In
conclusion, the dual FXR/TGR5 agonist INT-767 ameliorates the metabolic
profile  and  reduces  visceral  adiposity  by  improving  insulin  sensitivity  and
promoting brown differentiation in visceral adipose tissue.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP56
GP57
Prioritizing drug targets for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease based on
comorbidity network analysis
Thanh-Phuong Nguyen1, Thomas Sauter1, Laura Caberlotto3,
Frank Lammert4 & Jochen G Schneider2,4
1University of Luxembourg, Life Science Research Unit Systems Biology
Group, Luxembourg, Luxembourg;2Luxembourg Centre for Systems
Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg;
3The Microsoft Research, University of Trento Centre for Computational
Systems Biology, Rovereto, Italy;4Saarland University Medical Center,
Department of Internal Medicine II, Homburg, Germany.
Background and aims
Non alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) is highly associated with other
components of the metabolic syndrome, in particular obesity and diabetes.
However, systematic network medicine approach of the complex phenotypic
dependencies and comorbidities has yet to be performed. Our aim now is to
identify novel drug targets for NAFLD treatment by a systematic in silico network
analysis.
Methods
We constructed an interaction network of curated genes relevant to NAFLD and
its comorbid diseases of interest. Network mining was applied to characterize the
NAFLD comorbidity network, and identify the key genes based on centrality
ranking. Large-scale shortest path analyses showed NAFLD connectivity to other
comorbid diseases and allowed inferring the molecular mechanisms underlying
comorbidities.
Results
Overall, we identified 594 disease genes, most of which (38.7%) were related to
glucose  metabolism  disorders
(nZ230). Lipid metabolism  disorders were
represented by 116 genes, and obesity by 114 genes; 19 genes were associated
with metabolic syndrome, and 30 genes with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD). Network construction on the 594 disease genes resulted in a network of
2175 proteins and 4605 interactions from the human protein reference database.
Among the most central genes in the network, two genes were directly related to
NAFLD (TGBF1 and F2) and eight new candidate genes were inferred. We
identified ten key genes that were related to at least two diseases and then
consecutively regulated the comorbidities between the diseases. Of note, most of
the ten genes were related to lipid and glucose metabolism, and two (INS, IRS1)
were  involved  in  aldosterone-regulated  sodium  absorption  and  diabetes.
Furthermore, we found a large number of paths linking the NAFLD-related
genes to glucose and lipid metabolism disorders and obesity (46 143, 22 000 and
21 516 paths, respectively), in particular genes related to adipocytokine and
PPAR signaling and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
The comorbidity network analysis of NAFLD allowed the identification of genes
that could represent the most promising molecular targets for prioritization of
drug therapy in NAFLD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP57
GP58
Cardiac status after long-term growth hormone replacement therapy in
adult growth hormone deficient patients. A single centre audit based on
echocardiographic investigations before and during GH replacement
therapy
Sissela Skoglund1, Ulla Feldt Rasmussen1, Marianne Klose1 &
Christian Hassager2
1Department of Medical Endocrinology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark;2Department of Cardiology,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Objective
To determine the effects of long-term growth hormone (GH) treatment on heart
anatomy and function among adult GH deficient patients.
Design
A retrospective  observational  study  at  Copenhagen  University  Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Denmark between 1999 and 2015.
Patients
All patients with available echocardiography data at treatment baseline, 3-5 years
and 8-10 years follow up. We included 25 naïve GH deficient patients, i.e.
patients who had never received GH therapy before, and 16 semi-naive patients,
i.e. patients previously on GH substitution therapy, but who had not received GH
within 6 months before baseline evaluation.
Main outcome measures
Measurements  of  interventricular  septum  thickness
(IVSD),  left  ventricular
internal diameter end systole (LVISD), left ventricular internal diameter end
diastole (LVIDD), left ventricular posterior wall diameter (LVPWD), mitral valve
E/A ratio, mitral valve deceleration time and ejection fraction were assessed. Left
ventricular mass (LVM), left ventricular mass index (LVMI) and fractional
shortening  were  calculated  based  on  data  from  the  echocardiographic
investigations. Biochemical data including cholesterol, triglycerides, IGF-1 and
testosterone
(in  men),  blood  pressure,  height  and  weight  were  assessed  at
baseline, 3-5 years and 8-10 years after commencement of GH substitution.
Results
No significant difference was observed in cardiac structure, nor in cardiac systolic
or diastolic function during GH therapy. A non-significant positive correlation
was observed between change in IGF-1 SDS versus change in LVMI, at 3-5 years
and 8-10 years follow-up. In subgroups, a significant decrease was observed in
both systolic function among semi-naïve patients and in diastolic function among
adulthood-onset and naïve patients at follow-up.
Conclusion
Results from this study indicate that treatment duration of 8-10 years with GH
replacement therapy in physiological doses on GH deficient patients appears not
to be harmful, considering cardiac status. Verification of a positive effect of GH
replacement on LVMI will require a larger cohort of GHD patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP58
GP59
Familial partial lipodystrophy type 3 due to PPARgamma mutation:
presentation with diabetes and severe hypertriglyceridemia
Joana Oliveira1,3, Filipe Cunha1,3, Elisabete Rodrigues1,3, Joana Menezes1,3,
Ana Saavedra1,3, Maria Manuel Costa1,3, Daniela Magalhães1,3,
Rita Bettencourt-Silva1,3, Susana Fernandes2,3, Joa˜o Paulo Oliveira2,3,
Davide Carvalho1,3 & Paula Freitas1,3
1Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department, Centro Hospitalar
São João, Porto, Portugal;2Department of Genetics, Centro Hospitalar
São João, Porto, Portugal;3Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal;4Instituto de Investiga
¸
˜o e Inova
¸a˜o em Saúde, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Familial  partial  lipodystrophy
(FPL)  is  an  autosomal  dominant  disease
characterized by selective loss of subcutaneous fat from the extremities and
gluteal region, with lipohypertrophy of the face, neck and trunk. It is usually
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
tightly linked with severe metabolic complications. FPL type 3 results from
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG) mutations.
Case presentations
Fifty three-year-old woman, referred to endocrinology department for severe
dyslipidemia with hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia (11 729 mg/dl),
and ‘type 2’ diabetes (T2D). She was treated with insulin totalling 128 UI/d,
simvastatin (20 mg/d) and fenofibrate (267 mg/d). She presented with hyperten-
sion, and there was no history of pancreatitis. She had a family history of T2D,
dyslipidemia and premature cardiovascular disease (CVD). Physical examination
revealed: weight 50.3 kg; BMI 23.3 kg/m2; lipoatrophy of the extremities with
preserved  subcutaneous  fat  in  face  and  trunk.  There  was  no  xanthomas,
xanthelasmas or lipemia retinalis. A1c 10.3%; total cholesterol 921 mg/dl; HDL
cholesterol
56 mg/dl;  LDL  cholesterol
195mg/dl;  triglycerides
4679 mg/dl.
Lipemic serum, with milky appearance. Genetic study detected the variant
c.581GOA (p.Arg194Trp) in exon 4 of the gene PPARG. A patient’s sister, a
40-year-old woman, was also admitted to endocrinology department, with the same
metabolic disorders. Physical examination showed: weight
52.7 kg; BMI
24.4 kgm2; lipoatrophic extremities with muscular hypertrophy and vascular
prominence; abdominal prominence and hepatomegaly. A1c
12.7%; total
cholesterol 642 mg/dl; HDL cholesterol 90 mg/dl; LDL cholesterol 121mg/dl;
triglycerides 2404 mg/dl. Hepatomegaly with steatosis (22 cm). There was an
improvement of metabolic parameters after therapeutic optimization, but the
patient was readmitted
10 months later, presenting A1c
12.2%  and severe
hypertriglyceridemia (14 845 mg/dl), with eruptive xanthomas. Genetic testing
confirmed the same PPARG gene mutation.
Conclusion
The clinical features and biochemical profile suggested the diagnosis of genetic
lipodystrophy, confirmed as FPL type 3. We underline the importance of clinical
suspicion and early intervention of metabolic complications, in order to prevent
early onset of CVD and the occurrence of pancreatitis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP59
Clinical Case Reports
GP60
Endoscopic ultrasound-guided ethanol ablation therapy for pancreatic
insulinoma: an unusual strategy
Adriana de Sousa Lages, Patrícia Oliveira, Isabel Paiva, Francisco Portela,
Daniela Guelho, Luis Cardoso, Nuno Vicente, Diana Oliveira,
Diana Martins, Mara Ventura & Francisco Carrilho
Coimbra Hospital and University Center, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Insulinomas are the most frequent cause of endogenous hypoglycaemia. 90 to
95% of these are benign. Surgical enucleation or resection is the standard
treatment. Medical therapy focuses mainly on the use of diazoxide with few
alternatives in patients with high surgical risk.
Case-report
Female  patient,
89  years-old,  non-diabetic,  with  previous  history  of  acute
myocardial infarction, stroke with motor sequelae, pacemaker carrier and severe
aortic valve disease was admitted to the emergency department due to recurrent
hypoglycaemia,  especially  in  fasting,  with
3 weeks  of  evolution;  without
associated weight gain or access to hypoglycaemic drugs.
During  hospitalization,  the  patient  maintained  multiple  daily  episodes  of
hypoglycaemia  unrelated  to  food  intake  that  conditioned  need  to  maintain
continuous hypertonic dextrose infusion during nighttime and frequent oral
feedings during daytime.
Laboratory workout revealed a glycaemia value of 38 mg/dl (!55 mg/dl), serum
insulin of 10 UUI/ml (O3 UUI/ml) and C-peptide of 1.9 ng/ml (O0.6 ng/ml);
no  other  abnormalities  were  detected.  Abdominal  CT  identified  a
12 mm
hypervascular nodular lesion of the pancreatic body suggestive of insulinoma.
Attending to the comorbidities and age, the patient was not approved for surgery
and therapy with diazoxide was initiated to a maximum dose of 75 mg/day. The
lack of success of medical therapy was related to the difficulty in drug dose
titration by the risk of congestive heart failure.
Endoscopic ultrasound-guided ethanol ablation therapy was a viable solution and
0.6 ml of ethanol was injected by transgastric approach; no complications were
registered.
No  symptomatic  episodes  of  hypoglycaemia  were  noted  during  5  months-
follow-up.
Conclusion
Ethanol ablation therapy of insulinomas is a minimally invasive alternative
treatment with low complication rates although with little experience. In high risk
patients, this may be one of the only feasible options with satisfactory clinical
results and significant impact on quality of life and survival.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP60
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
GP61
An unusual presentation of an ovarian teratoma
Natalie Hill, Kavitha Lakshmipathy, James Clark, Benjamin Field &
Sunil Zachariah
East Surrey Hospital Department of Endocrinology, Redhill, Surrey, UK.
Introduction
Hormone-secreting teratomas are well described. However teratomas secreting
pancreatic  hormones  are  rare,  with  even  fewer  cases  producing  clinically
significant  effects.  We  describe  possibly  the  first  documented  case  of
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia due to an insulin-secreting ovarian teratoma.
Case report
A 23-year-old  woman  presented  with  transient  symptoms  of  lethargy  and
weakness. She had used her father’s capillary glucose meter to measure her own
blood glucose, recording values of 2.1 and 2.8 mmol/l. Further investigation
confirmed a fasting glucose of 2.7 mmol/l, elevated insulin (40.4 mIU/l) and
C-peptide (5.6 ng/ml), with a normal cortisol (624 nmol/l) and IGF-2/IGF-1 ratio
(!10). Abdominal ultrasound and CT scans revealed a 10 cm cystic teratoma
arising from the right ovary, with normal appearance of the adrenal glands and
pancreas.
The ovarian mass was removed laparoscopically. Histopathology findings were of
a mature cystic teratoma containing teeth, hair, skin, sebaceous material, cartilage
and a large, mature, pancreatic tissue component. Within this, immunohisto-
chemistry showed differential expression of insulin, glucagon and somatostatin in
islet cells. Hypoglycaemia did not recur post-operatively. The resolution of
symptoms following surgical excision suggests that the patient’s hyperinsuli-
naemic hypoglycaemia was due to ectopic insulin secretion from apparently
mature pancreatic tissue within the teratoma.
Conclusions
Ectopic hormone release from teratomas is well described, including AFP from
yolk sac-containing teratomas, hCG from pineal teratomas, and, most notably,
thyroid  hormones  from  cystic  struma  ovarii,  which  may  rarely  cause
thyrotoxicosis. Nevertheless there are few cases of pancreatic hormone-secreting
teratomas in the literature, with only a handful causing clinically significant
effects. We could not find any other cases of hypoglycaemia secondary to an
insulin-secreting ovarian teratoma. In summary, this unusual case demonstrates
failure of normal glucose homeostasis secondary to ectopic insulin secretion from
an ovarian teratoma, resulting in recurrent hypoglycaemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP61
GP62
Extreme enlargement of lower extremities mimicking elephantiasis in
patients with severe insulin resistance syndrome; a novel phenotype
Budoor Al Emadi, Hussain Raef & Yufei Shi
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Introduction
Severe insulin resistance syndromes are rare syndromes characterized by clinical
features like: acanthosis nigricans, ovarian hyper androgenism in post pubertal
females: hirsuitism, oligomenorrhea and infertility.
Major causes of severe insulin resistance are: i) genetic defects in insulin receptor
like type A syndrome, or ii) autoimmune like antibodies to insulin receptor like in
type B syndrome or antibodies to insulin itself, iii) congenital or acquired partial
or generalized lipodystrophy.
Case report
Here, we report three females (17, 21, and 18 years) who had been diagnosed as
severe insulin resistance based on the following shared features:
- Severe acanthosis nigricans;
- Hyperandrogeniticty (hirsutism and oligomenorrhea);
- Pseudoacromegaly;
- Very high fasting insulin levels ranging from 500 to 1700 pmol/l (reference
range 17.8-173) pmol/l.
Interestingly, all three patients were noted to have extreme lower leg swelling of
non-pitting edema that was present before starting the treatment. All of them were
subjected to skin biopsy. Results of skin biopsy of lower leg showed normal
subcutaneous tissue in one patient with perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate and
occasional eosinophils in the other two patients.
All of the three patients were positive for the same insulin receptor mutation.
Conclusion
Awareness of this extreme lower extremity swelling in patient with severe insulin
resistance syndrome would help to avoid unnecessary work up for other causes of
lower limb swelling.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP62
GP63
Triple X and premature ovarian insufficiency - case report
Catarina Roque, Catarina Moniz & Carlos Vasconcelos
Hospital de Egas Moniz, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
Premature ovarian insufficiency is characterized by precocious depletion of
ovarian  follicles,  associated  with  amenorrhea,  hypoestrogenism  and  high
gonadotropin levels. It afflicts 1% of the female population and in 5% cases
it is due to X chromosome abnormalities.
Case report
A 22 year old previously healthy female, presented to the Endocrinology Clinic
due to amenorrhea. She had no family history of amenorrhea, her menarche was at
age 11 and she had normal pubertal development. She complained of transitory
amenorrhea that lasted 6 months and spontaneously resumed to irregular cycles.
She denied any other complaints and mentioned the desire to become pregnant.
The analytical evaluation revealed: FSH 67.6 mUI/ml, LH 35.9 mUI/ml, E2
13.5 pg/ml; TSH, Testosterone, D-4AE, DHEA-SO4, 17-HO-progesterone and
PRL within the reference range. b-HCG !1 U/l. Transvaginal pelvic ultrasound
showed a normal sized uterus with regular endometrium, the left ovary with
normal dimensions and three microfollicles, the left ovary atrophic and without
follicular  activity.  In  a  second  visit,  hypergonadotropic  hypogonadism  was
confirmed (FSH 86.0 mUI/ml, LH 73.8 mUI/ml, E2 12.9 pg/ml) and at this point
she complained of progressively worsening hot flushes, that ameliorated with
hormonal therapy institution. Bone densitometry studies showed osteopenia at the
lumbar vertebra and femoral neck. Anti-ovary auto-antibodies were negative.
Anti-mullerian hormone studies were normal. Genetic studies towards CGG
sequence repetitions were negative for fragile X chromosome. The karyotype
analyses revealed mosaic 47, XXX (90%)/46, XX (10%). The patient was sent to
a clinic specialyzed in fertility for oocyte retrieval, but at this point there was none
with viability.
Conclusion
Some women with triple X do not show any manifestations other than menstrual
irregularity. In this backgrownd, premature ovarian insufficiency presents with
accelerated loss of follicles. Genetic testing is part of the differential diagnosis and
unexpected karyotype findings have important implications in fertility.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP63
GP64
Pseudohypoparathyroidism masquerading as seizures since childhood
Amudha Doraiswamy, Shalini Vijayasingham, Adelyn Henry,
Syed Omar Farouk Syed Alwi & Ruhaiza Mohamad
Hospital Melaka, Melaka, Malaysia.
Introduction
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) refers to a group of rare sporadic or inherited
disorders characterized by parathyroid hormone (PTH) resistance. We report a
case of PHP with phenotypical expression and multiple hormonal resistance.
Case description
We report a 26-year-old lady who presented to us after a fall, with history of
recurrent seizures since 12 years of age. There was a history of oligomennorhoea.
Physical examination revealed round faced, short-statured, obese
(BMI 31)
dysmorphic lady with subnormal intelligence and brachymetacarpia. Laboratory
work  up  revealed  hypocalcemia  with  a  corrected  calcium  of
1.4 mmol/l,
phosphate
1.98 mmol/l,  iPTH
366 pg/ml.  CT  brain  revealed  intracranial
calcification.  Hand  radiograph  showed  shortened
4th  metacarpals.  She  was
managed symptomatically with intravenous calcium initially and commenced on
calcium and vitamin D replacement. Further work up revealed hypothyroidism
(FT4 10.4 pmol/l TSH 20.73 mIU/l). On follow up she reported no seizures and
was eucalcaemic. The elevated PTH in our patient with chronic hypocalcaemia,
hyperphosphatemia, normal renal function and phenotypic features suggested
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (PHP-Ia).
Discussion
PHP is a complex disorder and diagnosis is often delayed. This was the case in our
patient whose initial manifestation was seizures occurring during pubertal growth
spurt corresponding to the higher calcium demand. The estimated prevalence in
Japan (of PHP type 1a and 1b) is 1/295 000. PHP-1a is characterized by resistance
to PTH and other hormones that stimulate adenyl cyclase in their target tissues,
such  as  TSH,  gonadotropins  and  GHRH.  Primary  hypothyroidism  and
reproductive dysfunction are commonly seen in these patients. Our patient did
in fact have hypothyroidism. Heterozygous mutations in the GNAS1 gene, that
encodes Gsa, when inherited from the maternal allele are associated with the
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
clinical  loss  of function  and  hormonal  resistance.  Patient  with  inactive  or
decreased amounts of Gsa showing phenotypic and biochemical features are
diagnosed as PHP type 1, similar to our case.
Conclusion
Our patient thus presents as a rare case of PHP-1a with multiple hormone
resistance with typical phenotypic expression.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP64
GP65
Turner syndrome and liver involvement: is there a place for treatment
with ursodeoxycholic acid?
Matilde Calanchini1,3, Ahmad Moolla1, Jeremy Cobbold2, Jeremy
W Tomlinson1, Andrea Fabbri3, Ashley Grossman1 & Helen Turner1,2,3
1Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK;2Translational Gastroenterology
Unit, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, John Radcliffe
Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK;3Endocrinology Unit,
Department of Systems Medicine, S. Eugenio and CTO A. Alesini
Hospitals, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
Introduction
Abnormalities in liver biochemistry are frequent in Turner’s syndrome (TS) with
a reported prevalence between 20 and 80%. While their aetiology remains
unclear, metabolic factors and intrahepatic biliary disease have been postulated.
Moreover,  some  TS  patients have  a  predominantly cholestatic  biochemical
abnormality and others a hepatitic picture. Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) has
been shown to be a useful treatment of cholestatic disease.
Case report
A 28-year-old patient with TS (45X/46XrX) was noted to have abnormal liver
function tests (LFTs) in 2006 (ALT 171 IU/l (10-45), ALP 693 IU/l (75-250),
GGT 232 IU/l (15-40)). At yearly follow-up, for the last 10 years persistently
elevated LFTs were found, mostly 2-3 times the upper limit of normal. The
bilirubin was normal and hepatic autoimmunity and serology screening were
negative. BMI has been stable (25 kg/m2). There was no history of diabetes,
hypertension,  dyslipidaemia,  cardiac,  renal  or  autoimmune  disease,  excess
alcohol intake or family history of liver disease. Treatment with HRT (started
age 13 years) was reduced, stopped and changed without any improvement in her
LFTs.
Persistence of abnormal LFTs led to liver ultrasound and liver biopsy in 2008,
both of which were normal. In 2009 she underwent cholecystectomy due to biliary
colic. MRCP in 2014 revealed normal intra and extra-hepatic bile ducts. She was
started on UDCA (13 mg/kg per day) from 2014 and after 12 months her LFTs
had improved considerably to near normal ranges (ALT 46 UI/l, ALP 144 IU/l
(30-130), GGT 89 UI/l).
Conclusions
This case illustrates that oestrogen therapy does not lead to deterioration in LFTs
in TS patients, and importantly shows for the first time that UDCA treatment may
be of benefit to TS patients with abnormal LFTs. Due to the high prevalence of
LFT abnormalities in this population, the use of UDCA warrants further study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP65
GP66
Secondary adrenal insufficiency and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
in a patient with advanced medullary thyroid carcinoma on treatment
with vandetanib. May it have a pathogenic role?
Álvarez Escolá1, Moreno Domínguez1, Cárdenas Salas1,
Castelo Fernández1, Lecumberri Santamaría1 & Elviro Pe
˜a2
1Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain;2Hospital Universitario de
Getafe, Getafe, Madrid, Spain.
Clinical case
We report the case of a 40-year-old woman, diagnosed with sporadic medullary
thyroid carcinoma (MTC) treated with total thyroidectomy, cervical lymph node
dissection and chemotherapy. During follow-up, cervical lymph node, lung,
breast, bone and subcentimeter cerebellous affectation was observed. She started
on Sunitinib, but withdrawal at 6 months due to severe inguinal inverse psoriasis.
Then, treatment with vandetanib was started with good response. Tumor markers
levels decreased with treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) from
calcitonin 19 504 pg/ml and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 202.1 ng/ml, to
273 pg/ml and 23.4 ng/ml respectively. While lung, cerebellous and bone lesions
remained stables, breast metastasis dissappeared. Secondary adrenal insufficiency
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(AI) and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism developed, with other hypophyseal
function preserved. Pituitary MRI and anti-hypophysis antibodies were normal.
Discussion
AI has been reported as consequence of hypophysitis secondary to anti-tumor
agents as Ipilimumab. In our case, there were not data of hypophysitis. We
suggest that this effect of vandetanib may be due to its anti-angiogenic effect
probably  by  inhibiting  epidermal  growth  factor  receptor
(EGFR).  EGF  is
expressed in a lower form in nontumoral cells, as hypophysis cells, where EGFR
has been detected in 5-10% of them, mainly in gonadotrope and thyrotrpe cells.
Likewise,  EGFR  sobreexpression  has  been  described  in  metastatic  MTC,
associated  with  RET  mutation  M819T  with  a  specific  well  response  to
vandetanib. In the same way, ACTH-producing pituitary macroadenomas has
been  identified  as  good  responders  to  TKIs,  as  gefitinib,  due  to  the
sobreexpression of EGF in tumoral corticotrope cells that could be present in
nontumoral corticotrope cells.
Conclusions
In patients on treatment with TKIs, especially those with effect of EGFR, may be
interesting to rule out the presence of pituitary abnormalities if it is clinically
suspected.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP66
GP67
Nivolumab associated thyroiditis in a patient with squamous non small
cell lung cancer
Ayse Sendur1, Suleyman Nahit Sendur1, Ahmet Demirkazik2,
Selcuk Dagdelen1 & Tomris Erbas1
1Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey;2Ankara University
Medical School, Ankara, Turkey.
Nivolumab is the first programmed death 1 (PD-1) immune checkpoint inhibitor.
It is approved for use in advanced melanoma and squamous non small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). PD-1 immune checkpoint inhibitors can cause autoimmune
disease of endocrine glands, including the thyroid. Here, we present a case of
thyroiditis after nivolumab therapy.
A 61 year-old female patient with NSCLC was consulted to endocrinology
department for abnormal thyroid function test results. Thyroid hormone results
are consistent with hyperthyroidism (TSH: 0.01 mIU/ml, fT4: 45.4 pmol/l, fT3:
10.8 pmol/l). Thyroid gland was smooth, non tender and minimally enlarged. She
did not have history of prior thyroid dysfunction. In 2006, she was diagnosed with
stage III ovarian carcinoma and she received paclitaxel-carboplatin therapy.
Relapse occured after seven years in remission and she was given six courses of
paclitaxel-carboplatin and four courses of ipilimumab. In March 2015, she was
diagnosed with NSCLC and received thirteen weeks of paclitaxel-carboplatin.
Then six courses of nivolumab (3 mg/kg) was given fortnightly. Thyroid hormone
levels were normal after two courses of nivolumab. Serum TgAb, TPOAb, and
TRAb were undetectable. Thyroglobulin levels were O500 ng/ml (0-85) and
thyroid ultrasonography showed paranchymal heterogenity and small multiple
nodules. Thyroid scintigraphy result was consistent with diffusely reduced uptake
but the patient did not give consent to iodine uptake test. Propranolol treatment
was given. She was euthyroid approximately 8 weeks later. On follow up one
month later, she was found to have an elevated TSH of 81 mIU/ml, low fT4 of
3.7 pmol/l (12-22), and fT3  of 1.1 pmol/l (3.1-6.8). L-thyroxine therapy was
initiated.
This  case  demonstrates  painless  thyroiditis  which  initially  presented  as
hyperthyroidism and progressed to hypothyroidism under nivolumab therapy.
We recommend that all patients on anti-PD1 therapy should be screened for the
clinical and laboratory manifestations of thyroid dysfunction.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP67
GP68
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 in children: a clinical case
in siblings
Nadzeya Peskavaya1, Anzhalika Solntsava1, Olga Zagrebaeva1,
Olga Kniazkina2, Olga Barash2 & Natallya Kizevich2
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;22nd City Children’s
Hospital, Minsk, Belarus.
Introduction
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1) - severe disease that is rare
in pediatric practice. Clinical sings of APS1 are quite diverse, new components
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
may manifest at any age. Their timely diagnosis is critically important, some
symptoms can threaten patient’s life. We present our own clinical observation of
the APS1 course in siblings.
Case report
A 10-year-old  previously  healthy  boy  presented  with  severe  weakness,
drowsiness,  weight  loss,  craving  salty  foods.  Physical  exam  showed  skin
hyperpigmentation and low blood pressure. Patient had candidiasis of his oral
mucosa and nails. Investigations showed the low serum calcium, sodium and high
serum phosphorous and potassium levels. Cortisol level was 57.4 nmol/l (171-
720) and ACTH level was 2006 pmol/l (7.2-63.3). Values of other indicators
were in norm (TSH-4,1 mIU/l, GADA-0,38). Treatment of primary adrenal
insufficiency with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone was started. For hypopar-
athyroidism correction boy was commenced on calcitriol, calcium and vitamin
D3 supplements. The patient responded well to treatment with normalization of
the overall health and positive dynamics at laboratory inspection.
The patient’s 8-year-old sister was diagnosed with the primary hypoparathyroid-
ism at the age of 6 years on the basis of low serum ionized calcium (0.7 mmol/l)
and PTH levels (5.5 pg/ml). A treatment with calcitriol, calcium and vitamin D3
supplementation was started. She was noted to have candida infection of her
mouth requiring frequent antifungal treatment. Considering existence of APS1 in
a family the additional examination was conducted. GADA were positive, that
points to high risk of T1DM. Other studied indicators were in norm. Genetic
testing of patients with APS1 in Belarus is not conducted.
Conclusion
It was shown that it is extremely important to supervise all children in family
which already has a child with APS1. Families should be made aware of the
potential later manifestations of the syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP68
GP69
Suspected medullary thyroid cancer in a patient with neuroendocrine
tumor of left lung
Elzbieta Andrysiak-Mamos, Elzbieta Sowinska-Przepiera, Ewa Zochowska,
Bartosz Kiedrowicz & Anhelli Syrenicz
Department of Endocrinology, Metabolic and Internal Diseases, Pomeranian
Medical University, Szczecin, Poland.
Introduction
Despite recommendations neuroendocrine tumors may still pose diagnostic and
therapeutic problems. Patients are referred to specialized centers when their
disease has already progressed to generalized stage.
Case report
A 64-year old male patient was referred to the Department of Endocrinology at
the Pomeranian Medical University in 2013 because of liver metastases. His
medical history included a surgical treatment of left lung tumor in 2006 with
histopathology: Typical carcinoid (Ki67 12% - G2, T3N1M0). The patient has
suffered from the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome for a few years. He has had
abdominal pain for 1 year. Ultrasound and CT scan of the abdomen suggested the
suspicion of liver metastases which was later confirmed by histopathology
findings in core-needle biopsy specimen - neuroendocrine tumor with Ki 67
ranging from 17 to 31%. CT scan of the chest ruled out local recurrence and
metastases in the right lung. Receptor scintigraphy - NET metastases. High levels
of tumor markers were also observed (chromogranin 879 ng/ml, 5OHIO acid
181 mg/24 h, calcitonin 387 pg/ml, CEA 6.47, AFP 3.44 IU/ml). Ultrasound of
the thyroid gland revealed several hypoechogenic foci in both lobes, their sizes
ranging from 3 to 10 mm. A medullary thyroid cancer was suspected based on
fine-needle biopsy and high calcitonin levels. Thyroidectomy was performed.
Histopathology investigation revealed multiple foci of neuroendocrine tumor in
both thyroid lobes, with the Ki67 proliferation marker ranging from 7 to 22%,
ruling out the diagnosis of medullary cancer based on negative calcitonin staining.
The patient was treated with somatostatin analogues with good clinical effect and
with PRRT because of disease progression confirmed in imaging examinations.
Conclusions
High calcitonin levels and suspected medullary thyroid cancer in fine-needle
aspiration biopsy of focal thyroid lesions sampled from a patient with NET do not
rule out thyroid metastases associated with the underlying disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP69
Diabetes
GP70
The association between vitamin D metabolites and the DHCR7
rs12785878 polymorphism in German T2D patients
Nojan Nejatian, Marissa Penna-Artinez, Yasmin Moràn-Auth &
Klaus Badenhoop
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
Introduction
Hypercholesterolemia is frequently found in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Cholesterol is metabolized from 7-dehydrocholesterol by 7-dehydrocholesterol
reductase (DHCR7) from 7-dehydrocholesterol, a precursor of pre-vitamin D3.
Therefore single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the DHCR7 gene could
regulate cholesterol levels and concentrations of vitamin D metabolites (25(OH)
D3  or 1,25(OH)2D3). For this purpose we investigated the SNP rs12785878
located near the DHCR7 gene in German T2D patients and healthy controls (HC)
as well as concentrations of vitamin D metabolites.
Methods
527 T2D patients and 654 HC were genotyped for the DHCR7 SNP rs12785878
by a Taqman assay. Additionally, 25(OH)D3 and 1,25(OH)2D3 plasma levels of
76 T2D patients and 281 HC were measured by RIA.
Results
The homozygous TT genotype was significantly more frequent in T2D patients
compared to HC (TT: 54.9 vs 50.2%; GT: 38.4 vs 37.8%, GG: 6.6 vs 12.1%,
PZ0.007), also the allele T (74.1 vs 69.0% OR Z1.22; 95% CI: 1.02-1.46) in
contrast to allele G (25.9 vs 31.0% OR Z0.82; 95% CI: 0.68-0.98, PZ0.03).
T2D patients had significantly lower 25(OH)D3  (median 12.6 vs 19.4 ng/ml
PZ0.0001)  and  1,25(OH)2D3
levels
(median
44.7
vs
51 pg/ml  PZ0.001)
compared to HC. T2D patients with DHCR7 genotypes GG and GT had lower
25(OH)D3  levels than those from HC with genotype GG and GT, and T2D
patients with the TT genotype showed even lower 25(OH)D3 (median 13.7 vs
20.9 ng/ml  PZ0.002)  and  1,25(OH)2D3  levels  (median
43.3
vs
52.3 pg/ml
PZ0.001) compared to HC with the same genotype.
Conclusion
Our results reveal an association of the DHCR7 SNP rs12785878 with German
T2D patients. The allele T may predispose to the development of T2D. In
addition, significantly lower VD levels were observed in T2D patients with the TT
genotype.  The  dysfunction  of  DHCR7
may  contribute  to  the  complex
pathophysiology of insulin action and or ß-cell secretion independent from its
effect on VD deficiency being a risk factor for T2D development.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP70
GP71
A critical evaluation of the metabolic syndrome definition: why we
should be more cautious
Sandra Slagter, Robert van Waateringe, André van Beek, Melanie van der
Klauw, Jana van Vliet-Ostaptchouk & Bruce Wolffenbuttel
University of Groningen/University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands.
Aim
We assessed in both men and women within different BMI- and age classes the
prevalence of MetS and its individual components, since these specific estimates
obtained simultaneously in a large western European population are lacking.
Secondly, we measured as well how age-specific blood pressure (BP) cut-offs
affect the prevalence of elevated BP and MetS.
Methods
Data of 74 531 western European participants, aged 18-79 years, were obtained
from the Dutch LifeLines Cohort study. Men and women were categorized into
three BMI classes and six age decades. MetS was defined according to the revised
NCEP ATP III. Furthermore MetS was defined, using either the recommended
cut-off  values  for  elevated  BP
(R130/85 mmHg)  or  age-specific  values
(R140/90 mmHg for those aged !60 years, and R150/90 mmHg for those
aged R60 years).
Results
According to the NCEP ATPIII 19.2% of men and 12.1% of women had MetS.
Elevated BP and abdominal obesity were the most common MetS components in
our population, dominating MetS prevalence especially in women, independent of
BMI. In the MetS population, already 65-78% of normal weight women had
abdominal obesity (overweight: 95-97% and obese: 100%), while in men this was
still only
0-18% (overweight: 35-70% and obese: 93-99%). Applying age-
specific BP cut-offs showed a great drop in the prevalence of elevated BP
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(especially among men !60 years and women R60 years) and MetS (in obese
men: K9% and obese women: K7%).
Conclusions
The prevalence of MetS components varies strongly between men and women
in an age- and BMI dependent manner. Our data indicates a disproportionate
contribution of elevated BP to the prevalence of MetS when a conventional cut-
off value of 130/85 mmHg is applied. For the MetS diagnosis, we suggest to use
age-specific values for elevated BP as well as to establish new thresholds for
abdominal obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP71
GP72
Olfactory and gustatory functions in patients with non-complicated type
1 diabetes mellitus
Kamil Baskoy1, Seyid Ahmet Ay1, Serdar Hira2, Murat Salihoglu3,
Ferhat Deniz1, Aynur Yıldırım1, Aytug Altundag4, Arif Yonem1,
Hakan Tekeli5 & Thomas Hummel6
1Endocrinology and Metabolism, Haydarpasa Training Hospital, Gulhane
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Biochemistry, Haydarpasa Training
Hospital, Gulhane School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;3Otorhinolar-
yngology, Haydarpasa Training Hospital, Gulhane School of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey;4Otorhinolaryngology, Istanbul Surgery Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey;5Neurology, Haydarpasa Training Hospital, Gulhane
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;6Interdisciplinary Center ‘Smell &
Taste’, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, TU Dresden, Dresden, Turkey.
Introduction
Olfactory and gustatory dysfunction in patient with diabetes mellitus (DM) and its
pathophysiology were studied in many previous studies. Some studies reported
that there was a relationship between type 1 DM (T1DM) and olfactory and
gustatory functions the presence of diabetic complications. However findings are
limited and controversial. The aim of this study was to determine the relationship
between olfactory and gustatory scores and patients with non-complicated T1DM.
Another aim was to present evidence of the association between olfactory and
gustatory scores and HbA1c values and disease durations.
Methods
The study included 39 out-patient non-complicated T1DM patients and 31
healthy individuals. Psychophysical olfactory tests were performed using the
commercially available ‘Sniffin’ Stick’ test kit. Taste function tests were carried
out using ‘Taste Strips’ method.
Results
There were no significant differences in olfactory tests between two groups (odor
thresholds: 8.63G0.91 vs 8.55G0.57, PZ0.66; odor discrimination: 12.97G
0.80 vs 12.74G0.79, PZ0.24; odor identification: 13.81G0.98 vs 13.72G0.89,
PZ0.69; TDI score: 35.34G1.94 vs 34.97G1.4, PZ0.37). There were also no
significant differences in gustatory tests between two groups (bitter: 3.45G0.51
vs 3.44G0.50, PZ0.90; sweet: 3.32G0.48 vs 3.38G0.49, PZ0.60; salty: 3.13G
0.72 vs 3.10G0.72, PZ0.88; total score of taste: 13.16G1.61 vs 13.13G1.22,
PZ0.92). When dividing T1DM patients according to HbA1c values into three
subgroups i) HbA1c values!7, ii) HbA1c values 7-9, iii) HbA1c values O9,
olfactory tests and gustatory tests did not differ between groups
(PO0.05).
Comparison of gustatory and olfactory scores according to disease duration
revealed that there were no differences between groups (PO0.05).
Conclusion
This study demonstrates that T1DM without complications is not associated with
olfactory and gustatory dysfunction. We also found that gustatory and olfactory
functions are not related with HbA1c values and disease duration. Further
research is needed with regard to the underlying mechanisms to explain olfactory
and gustatory dysfunction in T1DM with complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP72
GP73
Increased activation of ISCs isolated from diabetic mice
Wei Xu1,2, Wei Li1, Min Zha1, Peter Jones2 & Zilin Sun1
1Southeast University, Nanjing, China;2King’s College London, London,
UK.
Abstract withdrawn
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP74
A novel gene mutation in Berardinelli Seip Syndrome: Three case
reports
Adem Gungor1, Naile Gokkaya1, Yusuf Karadeniz1, Arzu Bilen2 &
Habib Bilen1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Ataturk University, Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of Internal
Medicine, Ataturk University, Erzurum, Turkey.
Introduction
Berardinelli Seip Congenital Lypodystrophy (BSCL) is a rare otosomal recessive
disease characterized by major criteria which are lypoatrophy, acromegaloid
features, hepatomegaly, hypertriglyceridemia, insulin resistance and minor citeria
which  are  hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy,  psycomotor  retardation,  hirsutism,
precocious puberty, long bone cysts, phlebomegaly. The presence of three major
criteria or two major plus two minor criteria required for diagnosis of BSCL. We
report three BSCL cases who are all from the same family and the same genetic
mutation of BSCL 2 homozygote pQ94X (stop codon) which is encountered the
first time in literature.
Case reports
The first case,
25 years old woman had appearance of acromegaloid face,
hyperpigmentation  on  her  skin,  widespread  acanthosis  nigricans,  diabetes
mellitus,  hepatosplenomegaly,  prominent  decrease  of  subcutaneous  adipose
tissue, hypertrophied limb and shoulder muscles. She had also chronic renal
insufficiency requiring hemodialysis, cirrhosis of liver, pericardial effusion and
hypertropy of left ventricul and interventricular septum. The second case is 20
years old man, the brother of the first one. He had acromegaloid face, darkening
skin, acanthosis nigricans, hepatosteatosis, hepatomegaly, diabetes mellitus and
hypertriglyceridemia. The third case is their cousin who is 16 years old man. He
had  similar  face  characteristic  with  them,  hyperpigmented  skin,  acanthosis
nigricans,  hepatosteatosis,  hepatomegaly,  diabetes  mellitus  and  absence  of
subcutaneous adipose tissue on entire body MRI. Genetic analysis of three
patients showed BSCL 2 homozygote PQ94X(stop codon) mutation which is
encountered the first time in literature.
Discussion
Although BSCL patients are born with typical phenotypic features, complications
settle with the progression of the disease. A serious disease, BSCL should be
followed and treated by multidisciplinary due to multiorgan impairments. In
addition to symptomatically treatment of BSCL complications, leptin, which is a
cytokine contributing to disease pathogenesis, replacement is becoming more
important recently.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP74
GP75
Intact proinsulin level is associated with insulin resistance but not
insulin secretory capacity in subjects with abnormal glucose tolerance
You-Cheol Hwang, In-Jin Cho, In-Kyung Jeong, Kyu Jeung Ahn &
Ho Yeon Chung
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kyung Hee University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Introduction
Proinsulin is a propeptide of insulin and C-peptide during physiological insulin
production and is increased in patients with type 2 diabetes. Increased proinsulin
in peripheral blood indicates impairment of cleavage capacity to process insulin
within the beta cell. Recently, chemiluminescence assays have been developed
that are able to specifically measure uncleaved intact proinsulin in peripheral
blood. In this cross-sectional study, we investigated the relationship between
intact proinsulin and insulin resistance and secretion in Korean adults.
Methods
We  performed  standard  75 g  oral  glucose  tolerance  test
(OGTT)  after  an
overnight fast in 388 subjects without history of diabetes. Glucose (0, 30, 60, 90,
120 min), insulin (0, 30, 60, 90, 120 min), C-peptide (0, 30 min), and fasting
intact proinsulin were measured and insulin sensitivity and secretory indexes
were calculated using the results of OGTT.
Results
Average age was 54.6G11.8 years and 41.5% of the subjects were male. Intact
proinsulin level was positively correlated with homeostasis model assessment
insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) (rZ0.504, P!0.001) and was inversely correlated
with insulin sensitivity indexes (Matsuda index: rZK0.445, P!0.001; OGIS:
rZK0.399, P!0.001). However, there were no significant correlations between
intact proinsulin and insulin secretory indexes (HOMA-beta).Total subjects were
stratified by glucose tolerance status; normal glucose tolerance (NGT, nZ33),
prediabetes (impaired fasting glucose and/or impaired glucose tolerance, nZ153),
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
and diabetes mellitus (DM, nZ202). Intact proinsulin level showed an increasing
tendency with the deterioration of glucose tolerance (P!0.001). In the NGT group,
intact proinsulin level was correlated with acute phase insulin secretion
(insulinogenic index) but not with the indexes reflecting insulin sensitivity.
However, in the prediabetes and DM groups, intact proinsulin levels were inversely
correlated with insulin sensitivity indexes (Matsuda index and OGIS index).
Conclusions
Intact proinsulin level increases with the deterioration of glucose tolerance and is
significantly  correlated  with  insulin  resistance  indexes.  Moreover,  intact
proinsulin partly reflects beta cell function.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP75
GP76
Oxidative stress in the gestational diabetes mellitus mother and
placenta
Cristina López-Tinoco, Francisco Visiedo, Mar Roca-Rodríguez,
Celeste Rosendo, Rosa Mateos, Carmen Segundo &
Manuel Aguilar-Diosdado
Puerta del Mar, Hospital, Cádiz, Spain.
Background and aims
The mechanisms underlying placenta oxidative stress co-existing with alterations
in maternal-placenta interactions during gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are
not well understood. We sought to evaluate the levels of oxidative stress markers
and antioxidants in women with GDM, and to assess the impact on placenta.
Material and methods
Pregnant women (63 with GDM, 63 controls) were enrolled, together with
41 cases and 21 controls for the follow-up study. Oxidative stress markers and
antioxidants  were  measured  between  the
24-29th  week  of  gestation  and
12 months post-delivery as well as in placentae from 6 controls and 6 GDM.
Results
Post-partum, we found significantly increased levels of lipoperoxides (LPO)
(P%0.001) and  catalase (P%0.001)  and significantly  decreased  glutathione
peroxidase (GPX) (PZ0.003) in both groups. Additionally, cases had lower
levels of glutathione transferase (GST) (PZ0.003) and controls had lower levels
of superoxide dismutase (SOD) (P%0.001). Multiple regression analyses were
performed to evaluate the influence of clinical and metabolic variables on post-
partum status. The levels of post-partum oxidative stress were significantly
related in the GDM group. Significantly increased levels of carbonyl protein
(p%0.05) and LPO (p!0.05) together with reduced antioxidant enzyme activities
of SOD (p%0.05) and catalase (p%0.05) were noted in GDM placenta.
Conclusions
We conclude that increased oxidative stress and reduction in antioxidant defence
mechanisms occur in the circulation and placenta of women with GDM. Since
these imbalances can lead to maternal complications, these variables need to be
monitored carefully during GDM pregnancies.
Keywords: gestational diabetes mellitus, oxidative stress markers, antioxidants,
placenta.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP76
GP77
Pancreatic damage induced by cigarette smoke: How does smoking
affect the pancreatic functions?
Senay Topsakal1, Ozlem Ozmen2, Rahime Aslankoc3 &
Demet Hancer Aydemir4
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Pamukkale University,
Faculty of Medicine, Kinikli Campus, Denizli, Turkey;2Department of
Pathology, Mehmet Akif Ersoy University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Istiklal Yerleskesi, 15030, Burdur, Turkey;3Department of Physiology,
Faculty of Medicine, Suleyman Demirel University, 32200, Isparta, Turkey;
4Department of Medical Laboratory, Health Vocational Schools, Suleyman
Demirel University, 32200, Isparta, Turkey.
Background
Studies have shown that smoking may increase the risk of pancreatic disorders.
This study aimed to evaluate the oxidative stress status, biochemical, pathological
and  immunohistochemical findings of  rats exposed  to the cigarette smoke,
pathogenesis of smoking related pancreatic damage and usability of Alpha Lipoic
Acid (ALA) for amelioration of cigarette’ harmful effects on rat pancreas.
Methods
Twenty eight female, Sprague Dawley rats were randomly distributed into three
groups. Sham group (S) (nZ8), rats given 0.1 ml of physiological serum by oral
gavage for 8 weeks. Cigarette smoke exposed group (CSE) (nZ10), rats exposed
to successive periods of cigarette smoke for 2 hours/day/8 weeks and given 0.1 ml
of physiological serum by orally during the study. Cigarette smoke exposed and
ALA treated group (CSECALA) (nZ10), animals exposed to cigarette smoke
(2 hours/day/8 weeks) and simultaneously treated by 100 mg/kg/day ALA orally
during the study. Total oxidant status (TOS), total antioxidant status (TAS) levels
and  oxidative  stress  index
(OSI)  were  evaluated  at  the  pancreas  samples.
Immunohistochemically  insulin,  glucagon,  calcitonin  gene  related  protein
(CGRP),  Caspase-3,  hypoxia  inducible  factor-1
(Hif-1),  Hif-2
and  TNF-a
expressions of pancreas were examined.
Results
Cigarette smoke caused statistically significant increase in serum amylase and
glucose  levels.  At  the  histopathological  examination  the  pancreases  slight
degenerative and apoptotic cells noticed both endocrine and exocrine part of the
pancreas in CSE group. Immunohistochemical examination revealed marked
increase in caspase-3, glucagon, Hif-1 and Hif-2, CGRP and TNF-a expressions
while decrease in insulin secretion in some Langerhans islets in CSE group. ALA
ameliorated biochemical and pathological findings in CSECALA group.
Conclusion
These findings clearly demonstrated that cigarette can cause damage in rat
pancreas and ALA has ameliorative effect of cigarette induced lesions.
Keywords: Cigarette smoke, pancreas, pathology, biochemistry.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP77
GP78
Effect of alpha lipoic acid on high fructose corn syrup induced hepatic
pathology
Senay Topsakal1, Ozlem Ozmen2 & Meltem Ozgoçmen3
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical Faculty,
Pamuklale University, Denizli, Turkey;2Department of Pathology, Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Mehmet Akif Ersoy University, Burdur, Turkey;
3Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Suleyman
Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey.
Objectives
High-fructose corn syrup (HFSC) is used as an artificial sweetener. However,
there is limited information about the metabolic effects. Fructose is implicated in
the etiology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease(NAFLD). Unfortunately, no
therapy for NAFLD currently exists. The aim of this study was to investigate the
hepatic lesion induced by chronic HFCS consumption and the protective effects of
alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) on hepatic pathology.
Methods
In this study, 24 Wistar Albino, were randomly allocated into three groups.
Groups were HFCS group and prepared 30% solution of F30 (24% fructose, 28%
dextrose) was given in drinking water for 10 weeks. The ALACHSCF group,
same dose HSCF given this group and ALA (100 mg/kg per oral) administered
the last 6 weeks of the experiment. No drug administered to the control group
(CON). Each group consisted eight rats and at the end of 10 weeks, 24 h after the
last ALA administration, they were killed.
Results
Statistically significant increase was observed in serum AST (pZ0.023) level in
HFCS group. Tissue MDA (pZ0.001) levels were also increased while CAT (pZ
0.001) activities were decreased in this group. Immunohistochemically caspase-3
(pZ0.000) expression were increased by HFCS significantly.
Conclusion
In ALA treated group all of these pathologic conditions were improved. HFCS
induced hepatic toxicity by inducing oxidative stress and apoptotic activity and
ALA was ameliorated these pathologic conditions. ALA may be alternative
treatment to reduce the fructose-induced hepatotoxicity.
Keywords: alpha  lipoic acid, corn syrup, hepatic damage, oxidative stress,
pathology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP78
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP79
Metagenomic analysis of saliva and biofilm microbiome of type 1
diabetics under continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion
Eunice Carrilho1,4, Ana Coelho2, Anabela Paula1, Francisco Caramelo1,
Mário Silva2, Francisco Carrilho3, Miguel Melo1, Luísa Barros3,
Carla Batista3, Filomena Botelho4 & Marques Ferreira1,4
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;2Faculty
of Dental Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Department of
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Coimbra Hospital and University
Centre, Coimbra, Portugal;4Institute of Biomedical and Imaging and Life
Sciences (IBILI), Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
The  microvascular  complications  of  diabetes  and  consequent  autonomic
neuropathy  may  cause  changes  in  saliva’s  secretion  and  composition.
Hyperglycemic levels can also contribute to various oral pathological changes
due to alteration of fungi or bacterial flora and dental biofilm surface, leading to
the onset of candidiasis, periodontitis and dental caries. The aim of this study was
to determine total bacterial load of saliva and dental biofilm of diabetic patients
under continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion and that of non-diabetics.
Methods
Twenty patients with type 1 diabetes under continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion were included and 20 non-diabetic subjects were randomized as age-sex-
matched controls. Unstimulated whole saliva and dental biofilm were collected
from all patients under fasting conditions (at least 2 h). DNA was extracted from
samples adding Bacteria Lysis Buffer (Roche) plus Proteinase K. The mixtures
were incubated during 1 h at 658C, followed by an in house extraction protocol
based in DNA precipitation and isolation with cold etanol. Total bacterial load
was quantified by Real-time PCR (qPCR) using primers targeting conserved
bacterial 16S rDNA sequence in the LightCycler 2.0 instrument (Roche) by
SYBR green detection.
Results
Diabetic patients had a significantly higher saliva and biofilm total bacterial load
than non-diabetic subjects. No significant correlation was found between total
bacterial load and glycated hemoglobin A1C.
Conclusion
This study suggests that type 1 diabetic patients have a higher saliva and biofilm
total bacterial load than non-diabetic individuals, regardless of metabolic control.
The knowledge of the diabetic oral microbiome may pave the way to the
redefinition of clinical protocols and to the creation of new public health policies
related to this population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP79
GP80
Study of serum fetuin-A in male patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus:
association with insulin resistance and possible role of metformin
therapy
Maram Mahdy, Nermin Shereba, Iman Ahmed, Mona Abdelsalam,
Yara Eid & Hany Mansour
Ainshams University Hospitals, Cairo, Egypt.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a multi system disease with both biochemical
and anatomic/structural consequences. A number of components of the metabolic
syndrome may be observed in patients with type 1 diabetes. It was suggested that
treating obese adolescents with insulin resistance using metformin is an option for
patients without response to traditional lifestyle change. It was reported that
fetuin-A could inhibit insulin receptor tyrosine kinase activity and induced a
lower-grade inflammation which resulted in IR.
Objective
To Measure serum fetuin-A level in type 1 DM male patients with and without IR
and to study the Effect of metformin therapy on fetuin-A level and parameters of
metabolic syndrome in type 1 DM male patients.
Study design
The study was conducted on two phases: first phase: a comparative study between
three groups: Group 1:20 male patients with type 1 DM without IR. Group 2:20
male patients with type 1 DM with IR and Group 3:20 age and sex matched
apparently  healthy  controls.  second  phase:  interventional  study,  includes
measurement of serum fetuin-A and other parameters of metabolic syndrome
on patients included in group 2 after metformin therapy for 3 months.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
Group 2 had a significant higher BMI, waist:hip ratio (W:H ratio), fasting blood
glucose
(FBG),
2 h post prandial blood glucose
(2 h  PP  BG),  HBA1C%,
Triglycerides (TG) LDL cholesterol, hs-CRP, and serum fetuin-A ratio and a
significant lower eGDR and C-peptide (P!0.001). Serum fetuin-A had a direct
significant correlation with BMI, waist circumference, W:H ratio FBG, 2 h PP
BG,HBA1C%, LDL, cholesterol, TG, and hs-CRP and an indirect significant
correlation with C-Peptide and e GDR. Patients in group 2 had significant
improvement in eGDR, 2 h PP BG, HbA1C%, hs-CRP, and serum fetuin-A after
metformin. EGDR was significantly correlated with HBA1C% and W:H ratio
(P!0.001).
Conclusion
Patients with type 1 DM may have IR in association with insulin deficiency,
those patients have higher fetuin-A levels, use of metformin may play a role in
improvement  of  insulin  sensitivity  and  decreasing  insulin  requirements  in
type 1 DM.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP80
GP81
Predictive variables of GLP-1 levels in postpartum reassessment of
women with previous history of gestational diabetes
Silvia Maraver-Selfa, Maria José Picón-César, Araceli Mun˜ oz-Garach,
Isabel Mancha-Doblas & Francisco Tinahones
Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Victoria, Málaga, Spain.
Objective
To study the GLP-1 pattern of secretion after an oral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT) in women in postpartum reassessment of previous gestational diabetes
(GDM). To evaluate clinical and laboratory parameters that can influence GLP-1
secretion.
Patients and methods
Forty-eight women with a history of GDM were assessed one year after childbirth
determining clinical and analytical characteristics and OGTT with 75 g. We
measured glucose, insulin and GLP-1 (baseline, 300 , 600 , 1200 ). Women were
classified according to the results of OGTT as healthy and prediabetic/diabetic
patients.
Results
Patients mean age of 35G5 years, BMI 29G6 kg/m2, SBP 117G12 mmHg, DBP
77G9 mmHg.  Laboratory parameters:  glucose
99G16 mg/dl,  insulin
9G
5 microU/ml, cholesterol 167G31 mg/dl, HDL-c 48G12 mg/dl, LDL-c 100G
23 mg/dl,  triglycerides
95G48 mg/dl,  HbA1c  5.5G0.38%.  In  postpartum
analysis, 23 had normal reassessment and 25 pathological OGTT. There were
no significant differences in levels of GLP-1 in both groups. GLP-1 AUC/AUC
insulin (rZK0.28, PZ0.05) increase GLP; AUC correlations between GLP-
1/age (PZ0.05, rZ0.28) were observed 1/AUC insulin (rZK0.38, PZ0.01) and
numerical correlation between increased GLP-1/c-HDL (rZK0.26; PZ0.07)
and increase GLP-1/BMI (rZK0.23; PZ0.12). The linear regression model
showed insulin AUC (r2Z0.1, PZ0.04) as predictor of GLP-1 AUC, and BMI
(PZ0,00),  triglycerides
(PZ0.01)  and  c-HDL  (PZ0.01)  and  AUC  insulin
(PZ0.02) as predictors of increased GLP-1 (r2Z0.5).
Conclusions
Women with GDM history and prediabetes/diabetes diagnosis in postpartum
reassessment do not differ in GLP-1 secretion after OGTT compared to healthy
subjects. The parameters related to GLP-1 response in postpartum OGTT are
BMI, triglycerides, HDL-C and insulin AUC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP81
GP82
Resistin gene polymorphism in offspring of patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus
Farid Fawzy1, Osama Khalil1, Hatem Salem1 & Mohamed Fawzy2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Zagazig University,
Zagazig, Egypt;2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of
Medicine, Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt.
Background
Resistin is a hormone that potentially links obesity to T2DM. Several single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified in the resistin gene
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
(RETN). Polymorphism of RETN C299 (GOA) may contribute to increased
resistin levels, which may be involved in the pathogenesis of T2DM.
Aim of work
To study the association between resistin gene C299 polymorphism and insulin
resistance in non-diabetic offspring of T2DM.
Methods
This case control study included 60 volunteers divided into two groups:
Group A: Control group including 30 healthy individuals with negative family
history of DM.
Group B: Offspring of patients with T2DM including 30 non-diabetic individuals
with positive family history of DM. The latter group was further classified after
OGTT into:
Group B1: 15 individuals with normal glucose tolerance
Group B2: 15 individuals with impaired glucose tolerance. All individuals had an
estimation of serum resistin level by ELISA and RETNC299 polymorphism by
PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism.
Results
We found a statistically significant increase of serum resistin (AA genotype and
combined GACAA genotypes), decrease in GG genotype, increase of A allele
(P!0.03) and increase in the indices of insulin resistance in the impaired glucose
tolerant offspring as compared to the control individuals as well as normal glucose
tolerant offspring. There was also a statistically significant association between
hyperglycemia and resistin gene polymorphism at positions C299 (GOA).
Moreover, a significant positive correlation was found between serum resistin
level and insulin resistance in impaired glucose tolerant offspring.
Conclusions
The present study supports that RETNC299 GOA SNP and increase in serum
resistin may have contributed to increased insulin resistance with subsequent
susceptibility to T2DM in offspring of type 2 diabetic patients. Those carrying AA
and combined GACAA genotypes are more at risk.
Keywords: Resistin gene polymorphism; Insulin resistance; Type 2 diabetes
mellitus; SNP.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP82
GP83
Does IGF2BP2 gene polymorphism have an effect on the development of
gestational diabetes mellitus?
Duygu Ilke Cikman1, Muzaffer Seyhan Cikman2, Mehmet Ali Kasifoglu3 &
Selcuk Dagdelen1
1Hacettepe University School of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Zekai Tahir Burak Hospital, Ankara,
Turkey;3Hacettepe University School of Medicine, Department of
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Objective
Gestational  diabetes  mellitus
(GDM)  is  a  multifactorial  disorder  with
environmental factors and genetic modifiers. IGF2BP2 gene polymorphisms are
shown to be involved in T2DM and diabetic nephropathy. Here, we aimed to
document the association between IGF2BP2 gene polymorphism and GDM to
understand the pathogenesis of GDM.
Design
Matched, case-control study.
Method
Ninety-three patients with GDM and 89 healthy pregnant subjects were involved.
IGF2BP2  (rs1470579)  polymorphisms  were  genotyped  to  examine  the
association between GDM and IGF2BP2 polymorphism.
Results
Although IGF2BP2 (rs1470579) polymorphism was more frequent in GDM
group, this association was not statistically significant
(PZ0.267). We also
examined the association between IGF2BP2 polymorphism and the clinical
parameters. Subjects bearing the risk allelle ‘c’ of IGF2BP2 gene had higher LDL
levels when compared the genotype aa (PZ0.034).
Conclusions
The contribution of the rare genetic variants such as IGF2BP2 (rs1470579) in the
development of GDM differs across the ethnicites. Here in this study, IGF2BP2
(rs1470579) was not involved in GDM. The association between IGF2BP2 and
LDL cholesterol levels may be attributable to the role of insulin-like growth factor
system in lipid metabolism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP83
GP84
Sitagliptin prevents kidney damage via modulation of NO and
JAK/STAT pathways in streptozotocin-induced diabetes in rats
Nouf Alrasheed1, Nawal Alrasheed1,2, Maha Al-Amin1, Iman Hasan1 &
Hanaa Ajmi1
1King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia;2Princess Nourah Bint
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Abstract withdrawn.
GP85
Impaired RBC deformability is associated with pancreatic beta cell
dysfunction and diabetic retinopathy in patients with type 2 diabetes
Ji Sung Yoon1, Ho Jin Kim1, Jun Sung Moon1, Ji Eun Lee2, Kyu Chang
Won1 & Hyoung Woo Lee1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam University College of
Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea;2CHA University Hospital, Gumi,
Kyeongsangbuk-Do, Republic of Korea.
Red blood cell (RBC) deformability is an ability of RBC to change shape under
stress, and it has been known to be decreased in diabetes. However, the role of
RBC deformability is not determined in type 2 diabetes (T2D) yet. We attempted
to clarify whether RBC deformability is related with diabetic complications. This
was  a  cross-sectional  study,  and
452
T2D  patients  were  enrolled.  RBC
deformability was measured by using a microfluidic ektacytometer, Rheoscan-
D (Rheo-Meditech, Seoul, Korea), and expressed as elongation index at 3 Pa
(EI@3P, %). 388 patients (mean age 60.37G11.98 years, male 233) were finally
included. When subjects were categorized into three groups by hemoglobin A1c
(HbA1c; !7% vs 7%!9% vs S9%), mean EI@3P was significantly lower in
the  poorly  controlled  group
(31.23G1.60
vs
31.00G1.82  vs  30.70G1.64,
P!0.05  by  ANOVA).  HOMA-B  and  insulinogenic  index  were  positively
correlated with EI@3Pa but not with HOMA-IR in multiple regression analysis.
EI@3Pa was significantly lower only in patients with retinopathy than those
without retinopathy (30.53G1.95 vs 31.20G1.53, PZ0.001). Of quartiles from
lowest EI@3Pa to highest (reference), the odds ratio for Q1 was 2.86 (95% CI
1.24, 6.62, PZ0.014) after adjustment for age, gender, hypertension, smoking,
duration of diabetes, GFR, and triglyceride. If EI@3Pa increase by 1%, the risk of
diabetic retinopathy will decrease by 24.9%. These results suggest that impaired
RBC deformability is related with decreased pancreatic beta cell function and the
risk of diabetic retinopathy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP85
GP86
Novel biomarkers of chronic kidney disease in diabetes
Zamira Zuraeva2, Olga Mikhaleva2, Olga Vikulova1, Aleksandr Ilyin1,
Minara Shamkhalova1, Marina Shestakova1 & I.I. Dedov1,2
1Endocrinology Research Center, Moscow, Russia;2I.M. Sechenov First
Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.
Background and aims
Microalbuminuria (MA) is not specific predictor of early stages of chronic kidney
disease (CKD) in diabetes. We investigate several markers that might be useful in
assessing early kidney damage in T1DM and T2DM patients additional to MA.
Materials and methods
We examined 111 patients (T1DM/T2DM: 51/60) with AER!20 mg/l (nZ80);
!199 mg/l (nZ18); S200 mg/l (nZ13). Biomarkers of kidney damage (collagen
IV), nephrin, podocin, cystatin C, kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), uromodulin, tissue inhibitor of metallo-
proteinases-1 (TIMP-1) were measured by ELISA in the morning urine and fasting
plasma; overnight AER by immunoturbidimetry assay; glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) was estimated by standard MDRD formula. All measurements were done in a
triplicate and blinded manner. Statistical analyses performed by STATISTICA 8.0,
using a Mann-Whitney test, correlations were analyzed using Spearman correlation
coefficients, differences were considered significant at P!0.05.
Results
In T1DM podocin increased prior to MA [0.17; 0.08; 0.084; P!0.05]; collagen’s
increase with CKD progression [3.86; 6.06; 8.663; P!0.05]. In plasma, we
observed cystatin C increase [1060;1022; 2391; P!0.05]; significant increase of
TIMP-1 observed at NA stage [2632; 2347; 2008; P!0.05]. Positive correlation
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
was observed between the collagen with AER (rZ0.48; PZ0.002) and serum
creatinine (rZ0.51; PZ0.001), KIM-1 with eGFR (rZ0.41; PZ0.05), NGAL
with AER (rZ0.44; PZ0.05), uromodulin with eGFR (rZ0.49; PZ0.05). In
T2DM, we observed significant distinctions in urine levels of podocin [0.192;
0.568; 0.084, p1-3, p2-3!0.05]; nephrin increase NAvs.MA [0.661; 0.904, P!
0.05], KIM-1 increase NAvs. MA [373.02; 434.47; 1109.08, P!0.05], NGAL
increase NA vs MA [1.74; 2.185; 14.66, P!0.05]. Biomarkers also had positive
correlation  with  standard  markers:  collagen  with  AER
(rZ0.48;  PZ0.002),
cystatin C, podocin and uromodulin with eGFR (rZ0.48, PZ0.002; rZ0.39,
PZ0.015; rZ0.49, PZ0.0002, respectively).
Conclusion
We suggest that urinary levels of podocin, collagen IV, nephrin might be candidates
biomarkers for early detection of CKD in diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP86
GP87
Comparison of aqueous concentrations of angiogenic and inflammatory
cytokines based on optical coherence tomography patterns of diabetic
macular edema
Moosang Kim
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea.
Introduction
The purpose was to compare aqueous inflammatory and angiogenic cytokine
levels in diabetic macular edema (DME).
Methods
Aqueous samples were obtained from 50 eyes with DME and 12 normal eyes
(control group). DME was classified according to the morphologic pattern based
on optical coherence tomography: Diffuse retinal thickening (DRT; nZ19),
cystoid macular edema (CME; nZ17), or serous retinal detachment (SRD;
nZ14). Aqueous samples were collected just before intravitreal injection and at
the beginning of cataract surgery in the control group. Interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8,
interferon-induced  protein
(IP)-10,  monocyte  chemotactic  protein
(MCP)-1,
platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF)-AA, and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) levels were measured by multiplex bead assay.
Results
The IL-6, IL-8, IP-10, and PDGF-AA levels differed significantly among the three
groups of DME (PZ0.014, PZ0.038, PZ0.021, and PZ0.041, respectively).
However, there were no differences between groups in aqueous concentration
levels  of  MCP-1
and  VEGF  (PZ0.205  and  PZ0.062,  respectively).  IL-6
(PZ0.026)  and  IL-8
(PZ0.023)  correlated  positively  with  central  foveal
thickness (CFT) in the CME group. None of the cytokine levels correlated
significantly with CFT in any of the DRT and SRD groups.
Conclusions
Aqueous concentrations of cytokines varied according to the morphologic pattern
of DME, which might explain the variable response to treatments such as
intravitreal bevacizumab or triamcinolone injection.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP87
GP88
Effects of metabolic control on bone mineral density and markers of
bone remodeling in adult patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus
Eleftheria Barmpa1, Spyros Karamagiolis2, Stelios Tigas3,
Parthena Navrozidou4, Marianna Vlychou4, Ioannis Fezoulidis4,
Georgios N. Koukoulis1 & Alexandra Bargiota1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, University of
Thessaly, Larissa, Greece;2General Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece;
3Department of Endocrinology, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece;
4Department of Radiology, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
Introduction
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is associated with reduced bone mineral density
(BMD) and increased bone turnover. However, data regarding the influence of
glycemic control on bone are limited. The aim of this study was to evaluate BMD
and bone remodeling markers in patients with T1DM in relation to changes in
glycemic control.
Methods/design
We studied 107 patients with T1DM (Group-D) (mean age: 34C8.1 years, M/F:
48/59) and 95 healthy controls (Group-C) matched for age, sex and BMI. Patients
in Group-D were re-examined after one-year (FU). In both groups, we measured
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), BMD at lumbar spine (LS) and femoral neck (FN)
by  dual energy  X-ray  absorptiometry.  Bone  resorption was  assessed  by
b-crosslaps  and  bone  formation  was  assessed  by  serum  levels  of  type
1
procollagen total N-terminal propeptide (TP1NP). Currently, fifty patients from
Group-D completed the FU and repeated the measurements as baseline. Based on
the current literature, BMD changes at LS more than 3% and at FN more than 6%
are considered to be significant.
Results
In Group-D, mean duration of diabetes was 15.1C7.4 years and mean HbA1c was
8.2C1.3%. In Group-D, BMD (g/cm2) and T-score were lower at LS and FN
compared to Group-C (LS: 1.024G0.201 vs 1.052G0.143. PZ0.04, K0.3G1.6
vs 0.9G1.7, PZ0.02) (FN: 0.696G0.121 vs 0.898G0.112, PZ0.042, K0.1C
1.5 vs 1.4G1.0, PZ0.038). No significant difference in b-crosslaps and TP1NP
was observed between the two groups. At FU in Group-D, 36/50 patients had O
0.5% reduction in HbA1c (Group-DR), 8/50 had about the same HbA1c (C0.4%)
(Group-DS) and 6/50 had O0.5% increase in HbA1c (Group-DI). At FU, Group-
DR  had  3.3%  increase  in BMD  at  LS  and  5.6%  at  FN  and TP1NP  was
significantly higher compared to baseline (PZ0.043).
Conclusion
T1DM is associated with reduced BMD but improvement of glycemic control
appears to ameliorate BMD and bone turnover.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP88
GP89
Low serum high-density lipoprotein level is associated with proliferative
retinopathy in patients with diabetes mellitus
Sakir Ozgur Keskek1, Nedime Sahinoglu-Keskek2, Bilge Basdogan1,
Sinan Kirim1 & Tayyibe Saler1
1InternalMedicine, Numune Training and Research Hospital, Adana,
Turkey;2Ophthalmology, Numune Training and Research Hospital, Adana,
Turkey.
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common chronic metabolic disease associated with
serious complications. Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is one of the most common
microvascular complications of DM. The aim of this study was to investigate the
association between DR and dyslipidemia
Methods
A total of 1363 subjects were included in this retrospective study. The participants
were divided into three groups, including a study group of 352 patients with
diabetes and retinopathy, a control group of 553 patients with diabetes without
retinopathy and a control group of 457 healthy subjects. The study group included
202 and 150 patients with non-proliferative (NPDR) and proliferative DR (PDR),
respectively. Groups were compared according to the demographic properties,
HDL, triglyceride, LDL, HbA1c and serum fasting glucose levels. MedCalc 15.8
(MedCalc Belgium) was used for the statistical analysis.
Results
Groups were comparable in terms of age and sex (PO0.05 for each one). Not
surprisingly, serum fasting glucose and HbA1c levels were high in patients with
diabetes (P!0.05, respectively). Serum HDL levels of the patients with DR were
lower than those in diabetic patients without retinopathy (P!0.001). Patients with
PDR had lower HDL levels than patients with NPDR (PZ0.011). There was an
association between low HDL levels and PDR (OR:2.1 Cl %95 1.4-3.1 PZ0.003).
Conclusion
In this study, we have found low serum levels of HDL in patients with PDR. Low
serum HDL level is associated with atherosclerosis and other vascular problems.
Diabetic patients with low serum HDL level may be more predisposed for
retinopathy. Diabetic patients should be evaluated for dyslipidemia to delay the
development of vascular complications.
Keywords: HDL, retinopathy, diabetes mellitus
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP89
GP90
Assessment of metabolic markers (myostatin, IGF-1), associated with
the state of the lean component in young adults with type 1 diabetes
Yuliya Dydyshka & Alla Shepelkevich
Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus.
Background and aims
There is compelling evidence that the decline in appendicular muscle mass is a
poor prognostic factor for the development of chronic complications of diabetes.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
In addition to chronic hyperglycemia, reduction of muscle component may be
determined by metabolic disorders. Therefore, the aim of study was to assess the
possible links between serum myostatin, IGF-1 and a reduction in muscle mass in
type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).
Materials and methods
Ninety-five patients with T1DM (60 women, 35 males) (mean age: 30.6 (24.9-
37.5) years, duration of DM: 13 (7-20) years, age of manifestation: 17 (12-23)
years, HbA1c: 8.2 (7.6-8.9%) and 55 (31 women, 24 men) controls. The research
involved anthropometry of patients, general clinic examination, serum myostatin
and  IGF-1,  dual  energy  X-ray  absorptiometry  using  a  program
‘Body
composition’.
Results
There was a reduction of lean component of the arms (UZ248; PZ0.017), legs
(UZ208; PZ0.002), total appendicular (UZ219; PZ0.004) and total lean (UZ
259; PZ0.027) component in men with T1DM. Differences of lean mass at
women with T1DM were in the increase of lean component of arms (UZ6774,
PZ0.044)  and  lean  android
(UZ604,  PZ0.008).  There  were  revealed
comparable levels of serum myostatin (589 (457.26-826) and 675.38 (491.94-
750.34),  UZ838;  PZ0.98)  and  IGF-1  (136.89  (101.13-177.97)  vs
129.45
(107.93-222.46), UZ695.5; PZ0.285) in patients with T1DM and controls.
Taking into account gender differences the content of lean component, men
compared to women with T1DM showed significant high levels of myostatin
(792.64
(557.03-972.83 529.23) vs (443.55-625.86) pg/ml, UZ232.5; PZ0.006)
and lower content of IGF-1 (146.77 (121.2-231.36) vs 106.15 (96.28-138.67)
ng/ml, UZ227.5; PZ0.004).
Conclusions
Elevated levels of myostatin in men with diabetes can cause more expressed loss
of muscle mass. Higher content IGF-1 explains the increase in the lean component
of the abdomen in women.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP90
GP91
Relationship between urinary metabolites and type 2 diabetes mellitus
by proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy method (1H-NMR)
Lorena Ivona Stefan1,6, Alina Nicolescu2, Simona Popa3,4, Magda Sandu3,
Maria Mota3,4, Eugenia Kovacs5 & Calin Deleanu2,6
1County Clinical Emergency Hospital, Department of Clinical Chemistry
and Laboratory Medicine, Craiova, Romania;2Petru Poni Institute of
Macromolecular Chemistry, Group of Biospectroscopy, Iasi, Romania;
3County Clinical Emergency Hospital, Department of Diabetes, Nutrition
and Metabolic Diseases, Craiova, Romania;4Department of Diabetes,
Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Craiova, Romania;5Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;6C.D.Nenitescu Institute of
Organic Chemistry, Group of Biospectroscopy, Bucharest, Romania.
Proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR) was applied to
investigate metabolic profile of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients and
identify possible disorders of T2DM.
We investigate the potential relationship between diabetic retinopathy (DR),
diabetic  neuropathy
(DN),  estimated  glomerular  filtration  rate
(eGFR),
anthropometric indicators (body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC),
waist to hip ratio (WHR), waist to stature ratio (WSR)), HbA1c (%) levels and
urinary metabolites in T2DM patients.
Serial urine samples of 334 healthy subjects and 388 T2DM patients with a
history of diabetes
!5 years were investigated by1H-NMR. The1H-NMR
spectra have been recorded on a Bruker Avance DRX 400 MHz spectrometer.
The results are evaluated in mmol/mol of creatinine.
A significant difference between the urinary excretion of valine (PZ0.007),
alanine (P!0.0001), g-aminobuthyrate (PZ0.001), betaine (PZ0.036), citric
acid (P!0.0001), trimethylamine-N-oxide (P!0.0001) and glycine (P!0.0001)
at  the  healthy  individuals  and  T2DM  patients  was  found.  The  values  for
3-hydroxyisolateric acid (PZ0.042), citrate (PZ0.019) and g-aminobuthyrate
(PZ0.037) increase in T2DM patients with retinopathy vs without retinopathy.
There was no correlation between DN and urinary metabolite picture in T2DM
patients. We found significant correlation between eGFR and dimethylamine (rZ
0.194, PZ0.031), gamma-aminobuthyrate (rZ0.239, PZ0.049), acetate (rZ
0.29, PZ0.035) and pyruvate (rZ0.275, PZ0.014) in T2DM patients. Our
analysis revealed significant decreased concentrations for citrate (PZ0.005),
dimethylamine (PZ0.013) and glycine (PZ0.009) in T2DM patients with the
increase of BMI. WC were positively correlated with gamma-aminobuthyrate
(rZ0.42, PZ0.01) and dimethylamine (rZ0.39, PZ0.03) and, no correlation
were observed between WHR, WSR and urinary metabolites in T2DM patients.
Alanine (PZ0.003), lactate (PZ0.015) and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid (PZ0.006)
increased with the increase of HbA1c levels.
Type 2 DM urinary metabolites are interesting in various aspects, such as
providing clues for the mechanisms of the disease or potential early markers in
diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP91
GP92
The effect of glucose variability on microvascular complications in type
1 diabetes
Luís Cardoso1, Carla Baptista1, Dírcea Rodrigues1,2, Luísa Barros1,
Daniela Guelho1,2, Nuno Vicente1, Diana Martins1, Diana Oliveira1,
Adriana Lages1, Mara Ventura1 & Francisco Carrilho1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;2Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Evidence implicates oxidative stress as mediator of diabetic complications.
Furthermore, glucose variability (GV) is associated with oxidative stress and
inflammation; however, association between GV and diabetes complications
remains to be established. Our aim was to assess GV in patients with and without
microvascular complications (MVC).
Methods
We analysed 2454 and 6593 h of continuous glucose monitoring of patients with
type
1 diabetes
(T1D)  and  labile  glucose  control  with  or  without  MVC,
respectively. Patients were matched for A1C. All data points were collected on
iPro2e.
Most patients were females (nZ36, 59%) and A1C was similar on both groups
(7.7G0.9 vs 8.0G1.2%, PZ0.372). Patients with MVC were older (36.9G4.8 vs
27.1G9.0 years, P!0.001) and had longer duration of T1D (22.7G6.1 vs 15.4G
9.8 years, PZ0.011) than patients without MVC. GV measured by standard
deviation
(3.5G0.8  vs  3.5G1.1,  PZ0.937),  mean  amplitude  of  glycaemic
excursions (6.5G1.2 vs 6.8G2.5, PZ0.716), mean of daily differences (3.8G0.9
vs 3.9G1.3, PZ0.796) was similar between the patients with or without MVC,
respectively. Interestingly, patients with neuropathy had higher GV measured by
lability index (15.1G7.6 vs 6.1G3.6, PZ0.02) and mean absolute glucose (3.4G
0.9 vs 2.3G0.7, PZ0.033) but they were significantly older (39.0 vs 29.3 years),
had longer disease duration (27.0 vs 16.9 years) and poorer glycaemic control
(A1C, 9.1 vs 7.9%) than patients without neuropathy.
Conclusion
GV was not consistently associated with higher burden of MVC. Though,
prospectively designed studies targeting GV are needed to definitively clarify the
importance of GV.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP92
GP93
High dose vitamin D treatment regulates the gene expression pattern in
T helper cells of type 1 diabetes patients
Marissa Penna-Martinez1, Helen Hess1, Claudia Doring2, Nojan Nejatian1,
Dimitra Bogdanou1, Firouzeh Shoghi1, Martin-Leo Hansmann2 &
Klaus Badenhoop1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University
Hospital Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, Germany;2Senckenberg
Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
Dysregulated T helper cells and vitamin D (VD) deficiency are important factors
in the pathogenesis of Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D). Therefore, we investigated
the immune effects of high dose VD-treatment on gene expression (GE) pattern in
T helper cells (Th) before and after VD-therapy in patients with T1D.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
Seven T1D patients with 25(OH)D3  levels below 20 ng/ml received 3 months
4000 IU/d  Vigantol  oil.  The
25(OH)D3  plasma  concentration
(using  radio-
immunoassay) and GE within Th cells (using GeneChip) were measured at
baseline (V1) after 3 months treatment (V3). VD-therapy effects on the GE were
evaluated using the differences between V1 and V3 (expressed in fold changesZ
FC) by the statistical computing environment R version 3.0.2.
Results
The 25(OH)D3 concentration increased in median from 14 to 38 ng/ml (PZ0.02)
after high dose VD. Furthermore, 48 annotated genes changed significantly in Th
cells of patients with T1D after VD supplementation. Important to note, unique
four genes  that  code for  dual  specificity  phosphatase
2
(ZDUSP2/FC:1.4;
PZ0.05), HAUS augmin-like complex, subunit 2 (ZHAUS2/FC:1.3; PZ0.01),
jun  B  proto-oncogene
(ZJUNB/FC:1.6;  PZ0.04)  and  mannose-P-dolichol
utilization defect 1 (ZMPDU1/FC:1.4; PZ0.02) showed a higher expression
after VD treatment, in T1D patients. In contrast, 44 genes were down regulated:
exemplarily, genes which code for interferon receptor 1 (ZIFNAR1/FC: K1.3;
PZ0.02), nuclear distribution protein (ZNUDC FC: K1.3; PZ0.04) and zinc
finger protein 830 (ZZNF830 FC: K1.4; PZ0.02).
Conclusion
The elevation of 25(OH)D3 induced by Vigantol therapy (4000 IU/day) leads to
differential GE pattern in Th cells from T1D patients (four genes upregulated/44
genes  down  regulated).  The  Th  cell  response  to  vitamin  D  results  in  an
upregulated gene set (DUSP2, HAUS2, JUNB, MPDU1) and a downregulated
gene set (IFNAR1, NUDC, ZNF830). Our data suggest an indirect VD effect on
both gene sets via activation of transcription factors such as activator protein 1
(AP-1) and signal transducer and activator and transcription family members
(Stat1 and Stat3), respectively.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP93
GP94
Calculated creatinine clearance using the CKD-EPI-formula shows a
reliable prediction and high correlation to 24-h-urine in patients with
diabetes mellitus but underrates systematically potentially leading to
withdrawal or no prescription of oral antidiabetics
Christof Kloos, Nicolle Muller, Julia Anschutz, Friederike Klein,
Katharina Burghardt, Sebastian Schmidt, Irina Schmidt, Klas Boer,
Gunter Wolf & Ulrich Muller
University Hospital Jena, Jena, Thuringia, Germany.
Introduction
To reliably assess glomerular filtration is of vital importance if oral antidiabetics
are used. We compared the CKD-EPI model, a clinically established calculation
model to assess creatinine clearance (CreaClear) with specimens from 24-h urine.
Method
Inpatients
(university hospital) with diabetes mellitus received a
24-h urine
collection
(24hClear)  or  since
2013  calculated  CreaClear  using  CKD-EPI-
formula (EPI). From 2014 to 2015 values of 615 simultaneously. Implausible
24-h-specimens (Creatinine excretion !8 or O22 mmol/24h) were excluded
(nZ268). Correlation (Cor) was calculated and mean values (MV) compared.
Results
Three hundred and forty-one persons were analyzed (nZ120 diabetes type1
(DM1), nZ285 type 2 (DM2), nZ12 pancreas diabetes (DMpankr). Seventy-four
(18%) had a 24hClear in the range from 40 to 60 ml/min (DM1 16%, DM2 81%,
DMpankr 3%). Mean values and correlations were (EPI vs 24hClear ml/min, Cor
(significance level), significance level T-test): whole group: 62.8 vs 75.1, Cor 0.88
(P!0.001),  MV P!0.001;  DM1: 82.1  vs 94.7 Cor  0.83 (P!0.001),  MV
P!0.001; DM2: 54.1 vs 66.0, Cor 0.87 (P!0.001), MV P!0.001; DMpankr
75.8 vs 97.1, Cor 0.85 (P!0.001), MV P!0.001. In 20% EPI was higher than
24hClear (DM1 27%; DM2 18%; DMpankr 0%). In regression analysis 24-h
creatinine excretion is negatively associated with an overestimation of EPI
(P!0,001).
Conclusions
Calculated values of creatinine clearance by the CKD-EPI-formula compared to
values from 24-h urine collection from routine data were highly correlated. CKD-
EPI produced lower values in 80% of the cases underrating in the range from
11(DM2) to 21(DMpancr) ml/min. This may lead to withdrawal or no prescription
of oral antidiabetics, on the other hand preventing drug induced complications.
The large difference of both methods in pancreas diabetes is caused by reduced
muscle mass.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP94
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP95
Association between coping styles of adolescents with type 1 diabetes
and metabolic control
Feneli Karachaliou1, Vassilios Petrou1, Chryssa Drossatou1,
Irene Kaloumenou1, B Kandyla2, Stefanos Michalakos1 &
Kyriaki Karavanaki2
1Endocrinology Department of Growth and Development, “P&A Kyriakou”
Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece;2Diabetic Clinic, 2nd Department of
Pediatrics, University of Athens, “P&A Kyriakou” Children’s Hospital,
Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Across different chronic diseases, it has been shown that problem focused coping
is associated with better adjustment. The aim of the study was to evaluate the
various coping behaviors of children and adolescents with type
1 diabetes
(T1DM) and their association with metabolic control and duration of disease.
Methods
The study population consisted of 65 children and adolescents with T1DM
(male/female: 22/43) with a mean (GS.D.) age of 12.6 (G5.2) years, disease
duration of 4.8 (G4.4) years and HbA1c of 8.1 (G1.6)%, who attended the
diabetic clinic of the University Department of a Tertiary Children’s Hospital.
The “Ways of Coping Questionnaire” (Lazarus and Folkman), adapted and
standardized in Greek population, was completed by all adolescents, 36 fathers
(67.9%) and 17 mothers (32.1%). Coping was categorized as: (i) active coping,
(ii) seeking social support, (iii) wishful thinking, (iv) problem avoidance, (v)
aggressive coping.
Results
There was a significant association between fathers’ and adolescents’ coping
styles in respect of “active coping” (rZ0.41, PZ0.016) and “seeking social
support” (rZ0.38, PZ0.023). Female adolescents used more the “seeking social
support” way compared to males (1.92G0.73 vs 1.39G0.99, PZ0.041). Duration
of disease was positively associated with the “active coping” style (rZ0.36,
PZ0.014). Regression analysis for metabolic control showed that greater use of
“aggressive coping” (PZ0.014) and lower use of “active coping” (PZ0.035)
were  related  to  a  significant  increase  in  HbA1c,  which  means  that  more
constructive behavior has a positive impact on metabolic control.
Conclusion
Active coping was associated with better metabolic control and longer diabetes
duration in adolescents with T1DM. Female adolescents with T1DM used more
the “seeking social support” strategy compared to males, which is also reported in
healthy adolescents. Assessment of coping behavior might be useful in the
identification of adolescents in need of particular support and counseling.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP95
GP96
How soon do we achieve glycemic control after bariatric surgery? A
comparative study among laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, mini gastric
bypass, and diverted sleeve gastrectomy with ileal transposition
Alper Celik1, Sjaak Pouwels2, Eylem Cagiltay3, Fatih Can Karaca1,
Deniz Buyukbozkirli1 & Surendra Ugale4
1Metabolic Surgery Clinic, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Surgery,
Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, The Netherlands;3Department of Endo-
crinology, GATA Haydarpasa Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey;4Kirloskar Hospital, Bariatric & Metabolic Surgery Clinic,
Hyderabad, India.
Background
Type 2 diabetes mellitus became a global problem during recent decades, and
unfortunately medical treatment fails to provide adequate control in many obese
diabetics. We aimed to perform a prospective comparative cohort study to
investigate how soon patients achieve glycemic control after three different
surgical options (sleeve gastrectomy (SG), mini-gastric bypass (MGB), diverted
sleeve gastrectomy with ileal transposition (DSIT)) within the first 30 days
postoperatively.
Methods
Medical charts of 251 obese, type 2 diabetic patients with a mean age of 52.84G
8.52 were used to assess daily changes in weight and plasma glucose levels.
Patients had a mean diabetic duration of 13.09G7.54 years, mean HbA1c of
8.82G1.58%, and a mean BMI of 36.04G5.76 kg/m2.Surgery types consisted
of SG (nZ49), MGB (nZ93) and DSIT (nZ109). Primary end point was the day
of mean fasting plasma glucose levels reaching below 126 mg/dl within 30 days
after surgery.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Results
In the morning of surgery, mean fasting plasma glucose levels was 177.63G
51.3 mg/dl,  while  on  the
30th  day,  it  was
131.35G28.7 mg/dl
(P!0.05).
According to the type of surgery, SG group did not achieve a mean plasma
glucose level !126 mg/dl within the first 30 days, postoperatively. Mean plasma
glucose level reaching !126 mg/dl was achieved on day 29 for DSIT (124.36G
20.21 mg/dl) and on day 30 for MGB (123.61G22.51 mg/dl).
Conclusion
We observed differences in glycemic control following different types of surgery
within the first 30 postoperative days. Patients in the SG group did not achieve
a mean plasma glucose level !126 mg/dl. Mean fasting plasma glucose levels
!126 mg/dl were achieved on day 29 for DSIT and on day 30 for the MGB.
Multivariate  logistic  regression  analysis  identified  preoperative  BMI  and
postprandial C-peptide level as independent predictors of postoperative glycemic
control in the DSIT group.
Keywords: Bariatric surgery; glycemic control; sleeve gastrectomy; mini-gastric
bypass; diverted sleeve gastrectomy with ileal transposition.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP96
GP97
Real-world comparative effectiveness of liraglutide, exenatide once
weekly and lisixenatide in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Amparo Marco Martínez1, Ana Martínez García1, Sandra Herranz Antolín2,
Gemma López Gallardo3, Pedro José Pinés Corrales4, Rosa Quilez Toboso5,
Miguel Aguirre Sanchez-Covisa6 & Jose Joaquín Alfaro7
1Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición. Complejo Hospitalario de Toledo,
Toledo, Spain;2Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición. Hospital
Universitario de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Spain;3Servicio de Endocrino-
logía y Nutrición. Hospital Santa Bárbara, Puertollano. Ciudad Real, Spain;
4Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición. Hospital General de Almansa,
Almansa. Albacete, Spain;5Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición.
Hospital General de Villarrobledo, Villarrobledo. Albacete, Spain;6Servicio
de Endocrinología y Nutrición. Hospital General Universitario de Ciudad
Real, Ciudad Real, Spain;7Servisio de Endocrinología. Complejo
Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
The improvement of glycemic control and body weight reduction by GLP-1
receptor agonist (GLP1RA) has been demostred in randomized clinical trials, but
comparative studies of the efficacy of different GLP1RA in real world and clinical
practice setting are limited.
Objectives
To compare the efficacy of liraglutide (LIRA), exenatide once weekly (EQW),
and lisixenatide (LIXI) treatment in a real-world and clinical practice setting.
Methods
Prospective, longitudinal, multicenter, and not randomized study that compares
HbA1c and body weight reduction in 135 patients with type 2 DM treated for six
months with LIRA, EQW or LIXI. Data for continous variables are presented as
mean (SD) and for categorical variables as percentajes.
Results
52.6% men, age 53.9 (9.7) years, 6.7% !1 years of evolution, 23.7% 1-5, 25.8%
5-10 and 41.5% O10, mean baseline weight 102.5 (18.6) kg, BMI 37.7 (5.9)
kg/m2, HbA1c 8.4% (1.4). 83 (61.4%) patients were treated with LIRA, 30
(22.2%) with EQW and 22 (16%) with LIXI. There were no differences between
the three groups regarding the baseline parametres. After 6 months we observed
change of Hba1c K1.09% (1.18) P!0.001 (K1.2%(1.4) LIRA, K1.1% (1.2)
EQW, P!0.001 for both and K0.8%(1.8) ns LIXI). Weight K3.6 kg (4.1)
(K3.9 kg (5.5) LIRA, K3.6 kg (4.1) EQW P!0.001 for both, K2.8 kg (3.6)
LIXI ns). Composite end points was analized, 47.4% achieved HbA1c!7%
(59.2% LIRA, 46.4% EQW, 35.3% LIXI), 45.2% weight reduction O3% (52.7%
LIRA, 55.6% EQW, 41.2% LIXI), 25.9% both parameters (31.1% LIRA, 37.5%
EQW 11.8% LIXI). No differences was observed between groups.6 (4.4%)
patients were lost from follow up (four LIRA, two EQW) and 26 (19.3%)
discontinued the treatment (14 (16.8%) LIRA, 1 (3%) EQW and 11 (50%) LIXI).
Conclusions
In a real-world setting, HbA1c improved similarly in patients initiating EQW or
LIRA, and minor efficacy was observed in LIXI group. Weight reducction was
similar  in  all  groups  of  treatment.  The  biggest  proportion  of  treatment
discontinuation was observerd among members of the LIXI group.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP97
GP98
Efficacy and safety of SGLT2 inhibitor Canagliflozin in the treatment of
type 2 diabetes mellitus in clinical practice
Iciar Martín-Timón, Cristina Sevillano-Collantes, Inmaculada Moreno-Ruíz
& Francisco Javier del Can˜ izo-Gómez
Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor, Madrid, Spain.
In clinical trials, the SGLT2 inhibitor Canagliflozin inhibits renal reabsorption of
glucose, increases its excretion and reduces hyperglycaemia in patients with type
2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The increase in glucosuria and diuresis produced,
results in a reduction in weight and blood pressure (BP). Moreover, It may cause
genital and urinary tract infections. However, does Canagliflozin behave in the
same way in routine clinical practice?
Objective
To make a short-term assessment in routine clinical practice of the efficacy and
safety of Canagliflozin in patients with T2DM.
Material and methods
Thirty-three T2DM patients of 60.4G10.9 years of age and 13.6G7.3 years of
evolution
(12
women,  21  men),  with  BMIO30 kg/m2,  HbA1CO7%  and
glomerular filtration O60 ml/min, had Canagliflozin 100 mg/day added to their
treatment in monotherapy (nZ2), double therapy (nZ6), triple therapy (nZ7),
oral  antidiabetic  drugs
(OADS)Cbasal  Insulin  (nZ5),  OADSCbasal  bolus
(nZ10);  OADSCrapid  insulin  (nZ1)  and  basal  bolus  (nZ2).  They  were
weighed and HbA1C, fasting glucose (FG), systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP
(DBP) were measured, before and 3 months after adding Canagliflozin. A
P!0.05 was considered significant (SPSS, v. 20.0).
Results
At  3  months,  a  reduction  in  weight
(P!0.001),  HbA1C  (PZ0.000),  FG
(PZ0.000) and SBP (P!0.01) was observed. Average reduction in weight was
3.45G2.9 kg, 1.13G0.83% in HbA1C, and 7.7G8.6 mmHg in SBP; 69.2%
achieved HbA1C!7% with a reduction in weight and SBP. Only two genital
(6%) and one urinary tract (3%) infections were observed.
Conclusion
In clinical practice and in the short-term, Canagliflozin added to the treatment of
poorly  controlled and  obese  T2DM  patients,  at  any therapeutic level,  was
translated into a reduction in weight, HbA1C and SBP in more than 2/3 parts, with
few adverse effects. Long-term studies with more number of patients should be
conducted to find out whether the results are maintained.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP98
GP99
Liraglutide increases surfactant proteins (SPA & SPB) and angiotensin-
converting enzymes (ACE & ACE2) expression in a rat model of acute
lung injury by bleomycin
Juan Fandi
˜ o, Laura Toba, Maria Gonzalez-Nun˜ ez, Yolanda Diz-Chaves,
Lucas Gonzalez-Matías & Federico Mallo
University of Vigo, Vigo/Pontevedra, Spain.
Acute lung injury (ALI) is characterized by endothelial and epithelial damage,
followed by inflammatory. Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) is a gut-produced
hormone with insulinotropic effects. GLP-1 receptor is expressed in the lung, and
there implicated in the synthesis of surfactant proteins. We have previously
shown  that liraglutide
(LIR),  a GLP-1  receptor  agonist, restores surfactant
protein-B
(SPB) levels, a limiting factor for survival, and also angiotensin
converting enzymes (ACE and ACE-2), in a type-1 diabetes animal model. The
aim of this work was to elucidate the effect of LIR in the production of surfactant
proteins and ACEs in an animal model of ALI.
ALI was induced by a single intra-tracheal instillation of bleomycin (BLM,
2.5 mg/kg) on day 0 into rats. Rats were treated with liraglutide (100 mg/kg per 12 h
sc.) or vehicle (0.9% saline) from day K1 to day 6, and sacrificed in day 7. Left lungs
were extracted & weighted, and caudal lobes used for mRNA extraction.
BLM instillation increases left lung weight, revealing an inflammatory response with
interstitial oedema. LIR treatment did not revert lung weight increase, since not
attenuating inflammatory process. In agreement, BLM instillation decreases mRNA
expression of surfactant proteins A and B (79%, PZ0.021 and 72%, PZ0.002 vs
control group, respectively), which was prevented by the administration of LIR. ACE
and ACE-2 expression levels were also markedly reduced after BLM instillation
(68%,  P!0.01  and  70%,  P!0.001  vs  control,  respectively).  Again,  LIR
administration restored the levels of both enzymes.
In conclusion, LIR restores surfactant proteins and angiotensin converting enzymes
expression in the lung, in a rat model of ALI. This implicates that LIR could improve
pulmonary functionality in ALI, regardless of the inflammatory response.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP99
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Endocrine Nursing
GP100
The risk of obstructive sleep apnea and correlation with cardiovascular
risk factors in patients with pituitary adenomas
Christine Yedinak
Oregon Health & Sciences University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Introduction
Sleep disorders (SD) confer high cardiovascular risk (related to 52-70% of acute
myocardial infarctions and strokes). Hypertension (HTN), diabetes (DM), weight
gain, sleepiness, fatigue and depression have been correlated with obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA). Patients with pituitary adenomas (PA) present with reported
sleep dysfunction, fatigue and metabolic risk factors that may persist despite
treatment
Aim
Assess the correlation between sleep disturbance (SD), depression, BMI, HTN,
diabetes Mellitus (DM), pituitary deficiencies (PD), tumor size, diagnosis and risk
of OSA for patients with PA.
Methods
A single institution, prospective assessment of patients presenting with PA using
modified: Piper Fatigue Scale (PFS), Epworth Sleepiness scale (ESS), Beck
Depression Inventory (BDI); Baseline BMI, tumor size (by MRI), HTN and DM
assessed. The STOPBang Inventory was applied to stratify OSA risk. Diagnoses
confirmed  by  biochemistry  and/or  histopathology.  Statistical  Analysis  with
PASW18.
Results
One hundred and fifty-seven patients (106F/51M; macroadenoma 74/micro 83)
enrolled. Mean age 45 years, BMI 30.1 kg/m2 (17.5%O35); DM 20% (18F/12M);
HTN 44% (40F/29M) 43.9% (40F/29M); Acromegaly 10% (16), Cushing’s
Disease (CD) 10%(16), NFA 40%(63), PRL 25%(39), RC 7%, other 7. Clinical
Depression found in 36% of patients (mood disturbance 56%), SD 64% (ESS O10,
PFSO2), and Pit Def O1-40%. Higher SD, BMI and depression were correlated
(PZ0.001) also BMI, DM and HTN (PZ0.001). SD, HTN, DM, PD, tumor size,
were not correlated. Patients with CD had more SD (PZ0.01), depression
(PZ0.007), DM (PZ0.001) and HTN (PZ0.03). Risk of OSA in PA was 57%
(90/157, high risk in 17%) with highest risk in presence of DMCHTN.
Conclusion
Sleep disturbance in patients with PA is correlated with depression, BMIO
30 kg/m2 and associated with a moderate to high risk of OSA, particularly in the
presence of diabetes plus hypertension. Evaluation of SD at baseline is warranted
along with further research into sleep dysfunction post treatment, particularly
related to metabolic indices.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP100
GP101
Waist to height ratio as a new marker of metabolic syndrome in type 2
diabetic patients
Imen Horchani, Mehdi Oueslati, Meriem Ouerfelli, Ibtissem Oueslati,
Karima Khiari & Nejib Ben Abdallah
Department of Endocrinology, Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Metabolic syndrome is closely related to abdominal obesity. Classic anthropo-
metric indices such as bmi and waist circumference have been used for the
screening of metabolic syndrome.
Recently, it has been reported that waist to height ratio is more closely associated
with insulin resistance.
The aim of the present study was to assess the relationship between waist to height
ratio and components of metabolic syndrome among type 2 diabetic patients.
Methods
We conducted a cross sectional analysis in 121 type 2 diabetic patients (56
women and 65 men). We measured anthropometric parameters (body weight,
height, waist circumference) of each patient. BMI was calculated as the body
weight divided by the height squared. Waist to height ratio was calculated as the
waist circumference divided by height.
Fasting blood specimens were collected to measure fasting glucose, HbA1c, total
cholesterol and triglycerides.
Results
The mean age of the study participants was 57.76G15.24 years. Waist to height
ratio was 0.64G0.08 in women and 0.55G0.07 in men (P!0,001). Statistic
analysis showed significant positive correlations between waist to height ratio and
respectively BMI (rZ0.79, P!0.001), waist circumference (rZ0.9, P!0.001),
systolic blood pressure (rZ0.28, PZ0.002), diastolic blood pressure (rZ0.218,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
PZ0.01),  total  cholesterol
(rZ0.3,  PZ0.001)  and  triglycerides
(rZ0.314,
P!0.001). However, There were virtually no correlations between waist to
height  ratio  and  fasting  glucose
(rZK0.018,  PZ0.8)  nor  with  HbA1c
(rZK0.13, PZ0.11).
Conclusion
Based on the present findings, waist to height ratio may be useful to predict the
presence of metabolic syndrome in type 2 diabetic patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP101
GP102
Influence of educational training course in improving the knowledge of
diabetes mellitus among nurses of Diabetes Education Units in Albania
Marjeta Kermaj, Dorina Ylli, Anisa Zeqja, Thanas Fureraj, Violeta Hoxha,
Gerond Husi & Agron Ylli
UHC ‘Mother Teresa’ Endocrinology Unit, Tirana, Albania.
Background
The  involvement  of  nurses  in  diabetes  patient  education  has  an  important
contribution in the improvement in the quality of care provided. Experience and
knowledge in diabetes and its management are crucial for teaching patients with
diabetes effectively.
Material and methods
The aim of the study is to evaluate the effect of nurse Training Course in the
improvement  of  the  knowledge  of  diabetes  among  nurses.  Ten  Diabetes
Education Unit’s nurses, one per each Albania’s regional hospital, aged from
25 to 55 years old, underwent the Training. To evaluate the diabetes knowledge a
multiple-choice questionnaire was assessed, before the training (T1), immediately
after (T2) and 6 months after the training (T3).
Results
The nurses, eight women and two men aged 35.5 G2.96 years old (medianG
S.E.M), having 9G3.2 years of working experience from which 5.5G3.4 years
were in endocrinology. The mean knowledge score before the training was 45G
2.9 out of 100. It improved to 68.5G1.4 immediately after and to 66G1.4 points
6 months after the training. There was a statistically significant difference
between T1 and T2 results PZ0.005, between T1 and T3 PZ0.008, and between
T2 and T3 PZ0.025. A significant correlation was observed between the T1 score
and the working years (rZ6.667, PZ0.05) and T1 score and the years working in
endocrinology (rZ0.729, PZ0.026).
Conclusion
We observed an improvement of the diabetes knowledge among the nurses
participating the training course and a slight knowledge decrease 6 months after the
course. Only the first test result was influenced by the number of years working in
endocrinology. These preliminary results suggest the importance of continuous
education in improving diabetes knowledge and giving a better diabetes care.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP102
GP103
Type 1 diabetes and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder:
development of new educational material
Sofia Sjoberg, Magnus Edgren & Kerstin Gutefeldt
Department of Endocrinology, Linkoping, Sweden.
Background
Patients with type 1 diabetes and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
are more often absent from clinic visits than patients with diabetes type 1 without.
If they come, they are often delayed, plasma glucose self-monitoring meters are
not brought with, blood specimen collections are not done and difficulties in self-
care are noticed. To achieve a stable blood glucose control, meals with a
calculated amount of carbohydrates matched with a specific dose of insulin, in
consideration of physical activity is desirable. Decreased ability of planning,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
perception of time, impulse control, setting goals and ability of organizing actions
over long time, affects daily life in various levels and are the core symptom of
ADHD.
Aims/method
First develop education materials for patients with ADHD aiming to improve the
understanding and knowledge of personal diabetes care. Second to develop
information material of ADHD and diabetes to all staff at the diabetes clinic. All
material have been reviewed by a neuropsychologist.
Results
Education material with pictures for patients has been produced. An information
booklet for staff about ADHD has been written, the importance of having a
distinct structure of clinic visits has been highlighted. To meet the same health
caregiver at every visit including limited amount of information are also key
factors. Moreover, memory pens for insulin, SMS-reminders for insulin injections
and visits at clinic, continuous glucose monitoring (i.e. FreeStyle Libre) and
connecting the patient’s own meter to a computer-assisted program for storing of
glucose values (i.e. Diasend) are other important tools.
Conclusion
Patient information based on pictures and less written text is easier to process for
people with ADHD.  Continuity,  in terms of  contact with the same  health
professionals is desirable. We have just started to implement our new material and
so far we have got positive feedback from our patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP103
GP104
Diabetic foot workshop to apply interactive learning method for nurses:
working with real patient as a teaching strategy
Mohammad Reza Amini1, Neda Mehrdad2, Mahnaz Sanjari1,
Maryam Aalaa1, Samimeh Shahbazi2, Zahra Shaygabmehr2,
Mohammad Reza Mohajeri Tehrani1 & Hossein Adibi1
1Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran;2Diabetes Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
Background
One of important issues which should be taught by the multidisciplinary health
care team in diabetes is related to the diabetic foot prevention and care. In this
regard, nurses as one of team members are able to provide specific services to the
patient including patient education and DF care. The aim of this study was to
explore impact of work with “real patient” as a teaching strategy for nurses in the
workshop.
Methods
Two days diabetic foot workshops are established for nurses by Endocrinology
and Metabolism Research Institute focused on the nurses role in prevention and
care of diabetic foot. This workshop was held four times in 2015 and120 nurse
were participated totally. In fact, the main teaching method of DF workshop was
doing education and dressing with “real patient” and other teaching methods
consists of case study, role modelling and team work activity related to the
diabetic foot prevention, education, management and rehabilitation. Pretest-
posttest is selected as a method to compare and measure the participants’ degree
of changes. Data analyse was performed through using descriptive statistics and
paired t-test by SPSS version 16.0.
Result:
Result showed that 89% of nurses were women and 85% had BS degree. There is
strong evidence (tZK2.345, PZ0.021) that working with real patient with
diabetes as a teaching intervention improves marks of nurses. In this data set, it
improved marks, on average, by w1.9 points. This result is at the 95% CI.
Conclusion
The interactive method of teaching with real patient who affected by diabetic foot
in DF workshop improve nurses’ knowledge and skill increase. It is clear those
DF nurse specialists who pass this workshop successfully will be able to provide
effective education and care.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP104
GP105
Short synacthen test - ESN only?
Anna Hawkins, Solomis Solomou, Yasmin Nikookam, Edel Casey &
Khash Nikookam
King George’s Hospital, Barking Havering and Redbridge University
Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK.
In the National Health Service (UK), there are ever increasing demands to
streamline care and develop patient pathways and guidelines as justification for any
test or procedure. This is to ensure optimisation in patient care and experience.
The role of a specialist nurse focuses on ensuring appropriateness and swiftness of
investigations, including providing a high level of clinical care which has its
foundations on communication and education for the patient/carers.
Our aim was to determine if patients who had their short synacthen test (SST) done
by someone other than the endocrine specialist nurse (ESN) encountered a negative
impact on their experience and/or potentially standard of care and results.
Patients were contacted and had telephone interviews, in addition to a
comprehensive review of their notes by the endocrine team.
65 patients had SST over a 6-month period. 33 (51%) of patients were contactable,
and 8 (24%) of them had their tests carried out by the ESN.
87% of patients seen by the ESN had results documented in the notes, 63% had
recorded actions taken. Following phone interviews 87% stated the test had been
explained to them and were satisfied with care received.
52% of the patients not seen by the ESN had results documented in the notes, 60%
had recorded actions taken. Following phone interviews 42% stated the test had
been explained to them and 63% reported they had been satisfied with the care
received.
Results showed that patients who were seen and treated by the ESN were
significantly more likely to have their test explained to them and more likely to have
their results documented in notes (PZ!0.05). There was also an increase in
patient satisfaction (PZ0.356).
It was therefore concluded that it is advisable for the short synacthen test to be
carried out by an ESN.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP105
GP106
Assessment of fall status and activity of daily living in older people with
type 2 diabetes
Maryam Aalaa1, Neda Mehrdad2, Mahnaz Sanjari1 &
Mohammad Reza Amini1
1Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran;2Elderly Health Research Center, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Population Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
Background
Diabetes is considered as one of the most common chronic diseases. Since
diabetes complications can lead to falls in the elderly and according to the fact
that the risks associated with falling are multifactorial, the aim of this study was to
explore the association between activity of daily living (ADL) and falling in older
people with diabetes admitted to the selected hospitals of tehran university of
medical sciences.
Methods
A case-control study was performed. The sample included 160 persons 60 years
or older who suffering from type 2 diabetes. 80 participants with a history of
falling and 80 participants without any history of falling during last year were
matched by age and gender the associations of the ADL stage with a history of
falling within the past year (none, once or multiple times) were explored using
demographic and ADL questionnaire. Data analyse was performed through using
descriptive statistics and independent t-test, c2 and logistic regression.
Results
Both groups of participants (83.8% of patients with and 85% of patients without a
history of falling) had a moderate limitation in ADL. Independent t-tests and c2
analysis showed that there is not any significant correlation (P!0.938) between
falling and ADL.
Conclusions
This study showed that the level of ADL in diabetic elderly could not cause the
fall alone. It seems that limitation of ADL, along with other fall risk factors such
as fecal incontinence and hearing impairment cause falling in older patients
suffered from diabetes type 2. Therefore, preventing falling must be considered in
this group with pay attentions the set of risk factors together.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP106
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP107
Managing children with diabetes within the family: living in the orbit of
diabetes
Mahnaz Sanjari1,2, Neda Mehrdad4 & Hamid Peyrovi3
1Endocrinology and Midwifery School, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran;2Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran;3Nursing Care Research
Center, Department of Critical Care Nursing, School of Nursing and
Midwifery, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran;4Diabetes
Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences
Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
Background
Diabetes is the disease of family and parents of children with diabetes face
different problems which concerns meeting the developmental needs of children
and daily control of children with diabetes.
Purpose
This article aims to explain how to manage diabetes around the child’s life within
the family.
Methods and materials
In this qualitative study, data was collected through semi-structured interview
technique and was analyzed using Grounded Theory approach. The process of
data collection was carried out by purposeful sampling. The participants included
13 individuals from nine families (11 parents and two children with diabetes). The
research environment was health centers in Iran providing care to the families of
children with diabetes. Data analysis was performed using Corbin and Strauss
approach. Data was analyzed with using MAXQDA Software (version 10).
Results
The core category of “Living in the orbit of diabetes” addresses the story of how
the family managing children with diabetes within the family which included
Main categories ‘shaping the children with diabetes’, “the formation of diabetes
family”, and ‘window to the endless orbit’.
Conclusion
The outcome of “Living in the orbit of diabetes” results capturing the control of
children with diabetes in the family. The findings of the present study may play an
integral part to help households with practicing appropriate strategies for the
management of children with diabetes.
Keywords: family, managing of children with diabetes, ‘living in the orbit of
diabetes’
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP107
GP108
Childhood leukemia survivors’ experiences of long-term follow-up in an
endocrine clinic: a focus group study
1
Anna Pålsson1, Marlene Malmstrom2 & Cecilia Follin
1Department of Endocrinology, Skane University Hospital, Lund, Sweden;
2Department of Surgery, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
Background
Survival rate after childhood cancer has improved markedly and today more than
80% of patients with a pediatric malignancy will become 5-year survivor. During
the past years it has become evident that many childhood cancer survivors suffer
from  late  complications  due  to  the  radiotherapy  and  chemotherapy.  It  is
established that the largest childhood cancer group, the acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) survivors, exposed to cranial radiotherapy are at particularly high
risk of endocrine complications.
Purpose
To illuminate childhood ALL survivors experiences of long-term follow-up in an
endocrine clinic.
Method
Data collection was carried out using semi-structured focus-group interviews.
Fifteen ALL survivors were included in the study, divided into four groups. Data
were analysed with conventional qualitative content analysis.
Results
The survivors experience of the care were captured in the theme: ‘The need of
understanding and support to manage daily life’. It was shown that understanding
of their situation, as well as support to manage daily life was fundamental for the
survivors. On the other hand lack of understanding and support from the society
was connected with fear for the future. The follow-up at the endocrine clinic was
shown  to  be  crucial  for  increasing  the  survivors  understanding  about  late
complications after surviving ALL. The past feeling of being out of control was
replaced with increased self-confidence among the survivors.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
The present results show that the leukemia survivors daily life was experienced as
a struggle and a complicated issue to cope with for many survivors. The theme
‘understanding and support to manage daily life’ mirrors how the survivors are in
need of knowing and support to handle and understand their complex situation
after surviving childhood leukemia. Offering understanding and support with a
holistic approach may be a way to strengthen the survivors healthiness, rather than
focus on living with complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP108
Endocrine Tumours
GP109
Expression and mutational status of USP8 in tumours causing ectopic
Cushing’s syndrome
Luis Gustavo Perez-Rivas1, Marily Theodoropoulou1,2, Andrea Oßwald1,
Julia Fazel1, Masayuki Komada3, Thomas Kirchner4, Felix Beuschlein1 &
Martin Reincke1
1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat
Munchen, Munich, Germany;2Department of Endocrinology, Max Planck
Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany;3Department of Biological
Sciences, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan;4Institute of Pathology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Munchen, Munich, Germany.
Introduction
Mutations activating USP8 have been detected in a high proportion of pituitary
adenomas causing Cushing’s disease and have been linked to an increase of
ACTH production in corticotroph cells. Whether USP8 mutations are involved in
the  tumorigenesis  of  the  ectopic  Cushing’s  syndrome
(ECS)  caused  by
neuroendocrine tumors has not been studied.
Patients and methods
In this work we evaluate the role of USP8 in a series of 17 tumors from patients
diagnosed with ECS by analyzing the expression of ACTH, EGFR and USP8 by
immunohistochemistry, as well as the rate of mutations of USP8 using Sanger
sequencing. USP8 expression was related to different clinical parameters and its
action was studied in vitro.
Results
USP8 was found to be widely expressed in all examined tumors, although at
different levels. Sanger sequencing did not detect heterozygous mutations in the
USP8 gene. ACTH immunoreactivity was detected in 11/17 tumors (65%). The
majority of ECS (12/17; 71%) had no or weak EGFR expression. No significant
association was observed between USP8 immunoreactivity and clinical data, such
as age, sex, BMI, hormonal levels or overall survival. Overexpressing USP8 and
EGFR in the bronchial carcinoid cell line NCI-H727 - that does not synthesize
ACTH - failed to trigger exogenous Pomc promoter activity.
Conclusions
Altogether these results suggest that, despite their role in pituitary tumors, neither
USP8 nor EGFR are actively contributing to the ectopic production of ACTH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP109
GP110
Thyroid dysfunction and ultrasonography features in patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer treated with Regorafenib: preliminary
results from a single centre prospective cohort study
Fabiana Pani1, Laura Orgiano2, Francesco Boi1, Elena Massa2,
Clelia Madeddu2, Valeria Pusceddu2, Mario Scartozzi2 & Stefano Mariotti1
1Endocrine Unit, Department of Medical Sciences M.Aresu, University of
Cagliari, Sardinia, Italy;2Medical Oncology, Department of Medical
Sciences M.Aresu, University of Cagliari, Sardinia, Italy.
Introduction
Regorafenib,  a  Tyrosine  kinase  inhibitor
(TKI)  recently  approved  for  the
treatment  of  metastatic  colorectal  cancer  patients  previously  treated  with
fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy, VEGF and EGFR inhibitors, may, like
others TKIs produce hypothyroidism, but this effect has not been systematically
evaluated so far.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Description of methods
Prospective evaluation of thyroid function, autoimmunity and morphology during
treatment with Regorafenib. From November 2015, 14 consecutive patients (four
males and ten females; mean age 64G8.1) with metastatic colorectal cancer with
comparable  tumoral  staging,  normal  thyroid  function  and  no  evidence  of
associated thyroid autoimmunity, were studied before and at monthly intervals
after beginning Regorafenib at scheduled dose of 160 mg oral daily according to
standard protocols. In all cases FT3, FT4, TSH and thyroid antibodies (TgAb and
TPOAb)  were  measured  together  with  clinical  assessment  and  thyroid
ultrasonography up to three months.
Results
Within 30 days of therapy, 6/14 patients (43%) became hypothyroid (TSH 5.8G
3.1, range 7-18.5) and TPOAb (199 and 88 IU/ml) became detectable in two
patients (14%), who also showed the highest serum TSH concentrations (18.5 and
11 mUI/l).Thyroid volume significantly decreased in 8 (57%) patients (from
9.2G2.1 ml before to 6.1G1.7 ml 2 months after Regorafenib, P!0.01 by paired
Student t-test), together with the appearance of mild hypoechogenicity and a
significant reduction of parenchymal thyroid vascularity (P! 0.05).
Conclusions
These  preliminary  data  indicate  that  Regorafenib,  similarly  to  other  TKIs
inhibitors, may rapidly cause rapidly hypothyroidism in about one half of patients,
and  probably  trigger  thyroid  autoimmunity.  Further  studies  are  needed  to
characterize longer-term effects on thyroid function-autoimmunity and to assess
whether hypothyroidism may have a prognostic value as a biomarker of clinical
response.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP110
GP111
Implication of Filamin A in pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors
aggressiveness and progression
Eleonora Vitali1, Stefano Ferrero2, Erika Peverelli3, Giulia Veronesi4,
Marco Alloisio4, Luigi Santambrogio5, Anna Spada2, Giovanna Mantovani2
& Andrea Lania2,6
1Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Endocrinology, IRCCS Clinical and
Research Institute Humanitas, Rozzano, Italy;2Pathology Unit, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca’ Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy;
3Endocrinology Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community
Health, Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of
Milan, Milano, Italy;4Thoracic and General Surgery Unit, Istituto Clinico
Humanitas IRCCS, Rozzano, Italy;5Thoracic Surgery Unit, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca’ Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy;
6Endocrinology Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas
University and Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Italy.
Pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors (PNTs) comprise a spectrum of neoplasms,
ranging from low grade carcinoids to the highly malignant small cell lung
cancers. Several studies identified cytoskeleton protein Filamin A (FLNA) as
determinant in cancer progression and metastasis. To date, the role of FLNA in
PNTs aggressiveness and progression is still unknown.
To address this question, we decided: i) to evaluate FLNA expression in PNTs
ranging from typical carcinoids to small cell lung carcinomas; ii) to manipulate
FLNA expression in order to assess its possible influence on cell proliferation, cell
adhesion and migration in PNTs cell lines (H727 cells) and primary cultures;
iii) to focus on the possible interaction between FLNA and Rap1, a small GTPase
implicated in the regulation of cell polarity and migration.
FLNA is highly expressed in PNTs with high malignant grade, this expression
being the highest in small cell lung carcinomas. Interestingly, FLNA silencing
reduces cyclin D1 levels in PNTs cells and H727 cells (K53G3 P!0.01 and
K48G13, P!0.05 vs C-siRNA, respectively) and cell proliferation in H727 cells
(K56%G10, P!0.01). In addition, FLNA-silenced H727 cells were charac-
terized by a reduction in cell migration (K25G9%, P!0.05 vs C-siRNA) and by
an increase in cell adhesion (C86G19 P!0.05 vs C-siRNA), thus confirming
that FLNA is involved in the control of cell motility. Interestingly, FLNA and
Rap1 co-localized in cellular protrusions and FLNA knocking down induces a
significant increase in Rap1 expression (C72G17%, P!0,01 vs C-siRNA).
In conclusion, these results demonstrated that FLNA is involved in mediating
PNT progression thus providing a possible diagnostic and therapeutic target.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP111
GP112
Presence and clinical-histological correlates of ghrelin and somatostatin
systems components in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
and lung carcinoids
Aura D Herrera-Martínez1, Manuel D Gahete2, Rafael Sánchez-Sánchez3,
Rosa Ortega Salas3, Raquel Serrano Blanch4, Juan Salvatierra5,
Raúl Luque2, María A Gálvez Moreno1 & Justo P Casta
˜o2
1Service of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Reina Sofía University Hospital
(HURS); Maimónides Institute of Biomedical Research of Córdoba
(IMIBIC), Cordoba, Spain;2IMIBIC; Department of Cell Biology,
Physiology and Immunology, University of Córdoba (UCO) HURS;
International Campus of Excellence in Agrifood (ceiA3), and CIBER
Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutri, Cordoba, Spain;3Service of
Pathology, HURS/IMIBIC, Cordoba, Spain;4Service of Medical Oncology,
HURS/IMIBIC/UCO, Cordoba, Spain;5Service of Thoracic Surgery,
HURS/IMIBIC/UCO, Cordoba, Spain.
Neuroendocrine  tumors
(NETs)  are  uncommon  neoplasms  with  increasing
incidence  and limited  therapeutic  options,  wherein  identification  of  new
diagnostic/prognostic/therapeutic biomarkers is urgently required. Alterations
in somatostatin
(SST)/cortistatin
(CORT)  and  ghrelin  systems  have  been
associated to development/progression of several cancers. Thus, we evaluated
expression levels of SST/CORT/ghrelin system components in gastroenteropan-
creatic-neuroendocrine  tumors
(GEP-NETs)  and  lung  carcinoids
(LC),  and
explored their putative relationship with clinical/histological characteristics in an
observational retrospective study with 90 GEP-NET patients (51.7%-G1, 36.7%-
G2,
11.7%-G3),
81
LC  patients  and
20
controls.  Clinical/histological
characteristics of GEP-NET and LC patients were, respectively: mean age 54G
17/54G15
years;
53.3%/50.6%  males;
37.7%/19.2%  incidental  tumors;
34.4%/7.5%  functioning  tumors;
46.5%-25%  metastatic  at  diagnosis;  and
34.1%-19.4% mortality rate. Expression levels of SST/CORT/ghrelin systems
components were assessed by quantitative-PCR using formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded  samples.  Results  indicated  that  mortality  in  GEP-NETs  patients
correlated  with metastasis,  SST immunostaining, and relapsed disease,  and
tended to correlate with vascular/nerve invasion. Similarly, in LC patients,
mortality was related with relapsed disease and metastasis, but also with tumor
diameter, gender, tobacco exposure, weight loss, and constitutional syndrome.
Quantitative-PCR studies revealed that the vast majority of SST/CORT/ghrelin
systems components were expressed in GEP-NETs and LCs and displayed
clinical correlates. Thus, for example, SST, CORT and receptor sst4 expression
was  lower  in  GEP-NETs  from  patients  without  family  tumor  history.
Interestingly, sst2 and sst3 expression was correlated with tumor-free surgical
borders, while sst5
expression correlated with vascular and nerve invasion.
Additionally, truncated sst5TMD4 expression was higher in functioning/sympto-
matic, and metastatic tumors. In LCs, ghrelin expression was inversely associated
with vascular invasion and with recurrence, while expression of its receptor
GHSR1a was higher in non-functioning and metastatic tumors. Altogether, these
data reveals a notable, widespread expression of key SST/CORT/ghrelin systems
components in GEP-NETs and LC, where they display clinical-histological
correlates,  which  could  provide  novel,  valuable  markers  for  NET  patient
management.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP112
GP113
FOXM1 as chemo-sensitizing target in neuroendocrine lung tumors
Friederike Christen1,2, Irina Grass1,3, Lina Worpenberg1,3,
Florentine Lewens1, Franziska Briest1,3, Britta Siegmund1 &
Patricia Grabowski1,4
1Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases, Rheumatology,
Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Germany, Berlin, Germany;2Institute of Biology, Humboldt-Universitat
Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Germany;3Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Freie Universitat (FU) Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Germany;
4Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, Zentralklinik Bad
Berka GmbH, Germany, Bad Berka, Germany.
Introduction
Neuroendocrine tumors of the lung (BP-NETs) are fairly rare tumors with very
heterogeneous behavior and molecular characteristics. They are very hetero-
geneous concerning their malignancy, ranging from slow proliferating carcinoids
(typical
(TC) and atypical carcinoids
(ATC)) to very aggressive large cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas (LCNEC) and small cell lung cancers (SCLC). For
the  highly  proliferative  BP-NETs,  combined  chemotherapy  is  the  standard
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
therapy option, whereas for the lung carcinoids, Everolimus has recently been
assessed in the Radiant-4 study as moderately effective concerning time to
progression. Nevertheless the treatment options are limited and unsatisfactory.
The cell cycle and DNA damage response (DDR) regulator FOXM1 has been
lately demonstrated to be associated with grading in BP-NETs tumor biopsies and
to be targetable by proteasome inhibition in vitro.
Purpose
The  experimental
(RNAi)  and  pharmacological
(bortezomib)  inhibition  of
FOXM1 was studied to assess the chemo-sensitizing effect of targeting FOXM1.
Material and methods
TC, ATC, large-cell NEC, small-cell NEC and a NSCLC cell line were treated
with siRNA against FOXM1 or bortezomib, cisplatin or a combination of cisplatin
and either siRNA or bortezomib versus controls. The efficacy and molecular
effects were studied by proliferation analysis, western blot, flow cytometry and
multiplexed gene expression analysis (Nanostring technologies).
Results
In TP53 wildtype carcinoids, knockdown of FOXM1 induced an enhanced
induction of apoptosis and reduced mitosis after cisplatin therapy versus controls.
Bortezomib, which shows several additional effects on DDR, strongly induced G2
arrest and reduction of mitosis in the cell lines. When combined with cisplatin, the
G2 arrest turned into increased induction of apoptosis in the majority of the cell
lines.
Conclusion
Targeting FOXM1 and Bortezomib treatment enhance the effect of cisplatin-
chemotherapy in BP-NET in vitro.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP113
GP114
Proteomic and pathway analysis of adrenocortical cancer in an in vivo
xenograft study
Zoltan Nagy1, Kornelia Baghy2, Eva Hunyadi-Gulyas3, Abel Decmann1,
Ilona Kovalszky2, Katalin Medzihradszky3, Karoly Racz1,4, Attila Patocs4,5
& Peter Igaz1
12nd Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary;21st Department of Pathology and
Experimental Cancer Research, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary;3Laboratory of Proteomics Research,
Biological Research Centre, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged,
Hungary;4Molecular Medicine Research Group, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences and Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary;5“Lendulet-
2013” Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences and Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary.
Background
Few  effective  medical  treatment  options  are  available  for  adrenocortical
carcinoma (ACC). Intensive efforts are therefore going on for exploring novel
pathways and treatment targets.
Objective
To perform a proteomic and pathway analysis on a 9-cisRA (9-cis retinoic acid)
and mitotane-treated ACC xenograft model.
Methods
43 male SCID mice xenografted with NCI-H295R cells were treated in four
groups (i. control, ii. 5 mg/kg 9-cisRA, iii. 200 mg/kg mitotane, iv. 9-cisRA C
mitotane) for 28 days. Protein isolates from three tumor samples from each group
were subjected to SDS-PAGE separation followed by LC-MSMS analysis. After
the normalization and statistical analysis of the data, one protein was chosen for
validation by Western-blotting. For pathway-analysis David 6.7 was used.
Results
47 significant protein-level changes were found in the 9-cisRACmitotane group
relative to the control. By considering literature data, the SET protein was
validated as being significantly down-regulated in the combined treatment group
relative to the untreated control. SET protein was weakly expressed in human
ACC samples, but not in benign adenomas, parallelling our xenograft data.
Pathway analysis indicated the potential interaction of significantly affected
proteins with p53- and Wnt-pathways that are known to be relevant in ACC
pathogenesis. Processes linked to ribosome and proteasome were also identified
as potentially affected.
Conclusions
The SET protein appears to be a novel player in ACC biology, but its pathogenic
relevance along with the other pathways need to be confirmed in further studies.
9-cisRA might represent a novel treatment modality in ACC that could be used as
an additive to mitotane.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP114
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP115
Loss of cells expressing the T-box transcription factor TBX1 might be
associated with a quiescent phenotype in parathyroid tumours
Chiara Verdelli1, Laura Avagliano2, Stefano Ferrero3,4, Vito Guarnieri5,
Filomena Cetani6, Leonardo Vicentini7, Edoardo Beretta8,
Alfredo Scillitani9, Gaetano Bulfamante2, Valentina Vaira3,10 &
Sabrina Corbetta1
1Endocrinology Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health,
University of Milan, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese
(MI), Italy;2Department of Health Sciences, San Paolo Hospital Medical
School, University of Milan, Milan, Italy;3Department of Pathophysiology
and Organ Transplantation, University of Milan, Milan, Italy;4Division of
Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milan, Italy;5Medical Genetics, IRCCS Hospital Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy;6Department of Endo-
crinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy;7Endocrine
Surgery, IRCCS Fondazione Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milan, Italy;8Endocrine Surgery, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan,
Italy;9Endocrine Unit, IRCCS Hospital Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San
Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy;10Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare
(INGM) Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi, Milan, Italy.
Embryonic transcription factors have been involved in tumourigenesis. The
transcription factor TBX1 regulates the embryonic parathyroid cells fate. Indeed,
it has never been investigated in human adult parathyroids. Here, expression,
function and regulation of the TBX1 gene were analyzed in adult normal and
tumour parathyroid tissues. Immunohistochemistry identified 30-70% (meanG
S.E.M,
52.0G7.3%)  of  cells  expressing  TBX1
at  nuclear  levels  in  normal
parathyroid glands (nZ5). About a half of parathyroid tumours [12 parathyroid
carcinomas and 13 adenomas (PAds)] had reduced TBX1C  cells (0-15%),
showing deregulated TBX1 mRNA levels. Immunofluorescence on PAds-derived
cells identified a subset of cells co-expressing TBX1 and PTH. Western blot
analysis on fractioned proteins from PAds (nZ11) showed that PAds expressed
the 53 kDa isoform C of the TBX1 gene mainly at nuclear level. TBX1 function
was investigated in HEK293 cells, which express the gene. Stable silencing of
TBX1 gene in HEK293 cells reduced nuclear TBX1 protein to 30% of basal levels
and increased the proportion of cells in the G0/G1 phase (from 38.2G6.7% to
50.2G9.1%, PZ0.04), suggesting that loss of TBX1 induced cell cycle arrest.
Consistent with the promotion of cell cycle arrest, TBX1 silencing increased
CDKN2A/p16 and CDKN1A/p21 mRNA levels and decreased ID1 (inhibitor of
DNA binding 1) levels both in HEK293 and PAds-derived cells, where any
significant change in both GCM2 and PTH levels could be detected by TBX1-
silencing. During embryonic development, TBX1 is regulated by the activation
of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway. Short-term (8 h) 10-20 mM lithium chloride
treatment induced b-catenin nuclear accumulation and inhibited TBX1 mRNA
levels in five out of seven PAds cell preparations. Moreover, PAds samples with
reduced TBX1 protein levels showed significantly higher AXIN2 mRNA levels, a
marker of b-catenin transcriptional activity (median, IQR; 0.16, 0.05-0.65 vs
1.57, 0.38-2.93; PZ0.03, nZ11). In conclusion, the embryonic transcription
factor TBX1 is expressed in a subpopulation of adult parathyroid cells, which is
reduced in half of tumours. Reduction of TBX1 expression is associated with cell
quiescence,  a  feature  that  might  be  in  line  with  the  extremely  low  cell
proliferation rate described in parathyroid tumours.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP115
GP116
Differential expression of protein kinase A catalytic and regulatory
subunits in adrenocortical adenomas
Isabel Weigand1, Cristina Ronchi1,6, Marthe Rizk-Rabin2, Guido Di
Dalmazi3, Davide Calebiro4, Vanessa Wild5, Felix Beuschlein3,
Bruno Allolio1, Jérôme Bertherat2, Martin Fassnacht1,6 & Silviu Sbiera1,6
1Departement of Internal Medicine 1, Endocrine and Diabetes Unit,
University Hospital Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany;2Institut Cochin
Department of Endocrinology, Paris, France;3Medizinische Klinik and
Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munchen, Germany;
4University of Wuerzburg, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology and
Bioimaging Center, Wurzburg, Germany;5Institute of Pathology,
University of Wuerzburg, Wurzburg, Germany;6Comprehensive Cancer
Center Mainfranken, University of Wuerzburg, Wurzburg, Germany.
Background
Heterozygous activating somatic mutations in the catalytic subunit a (Ca) of
Protein Kinase A (PKA) underlie 30-40% of cortisol producing adrenocortical
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
adenomas (CPA). The activity of the catalytic subunits a,b,g is controlled by the
regulatory subunits (Ia,Ib, IIa, IIb). Previous reports found uncommonly reduced
levels of RIIb in CPA compared to other adrenocortical tumors.
Aim
Investigating a possible correlation between Ca mutational status and RIIb
expression levels.
Methods
We performed immunohistochemistry staining of all PKA regulatory subunits
and Ca on FFPE tissue from normal adrenal glands (nZ12), adrenocortical
adenomas (nZ87 including 40 CPA, of which 18 Ca-mutated) and adrenocortical
carcinomas (ACC, nZ35). mRNA (nZ19) and proteins (nZ24) from CPAs were
isolated to perform qPCR and immunoblotting. Functional experiments were
performed in the ACC cell line NCI-H295R.
Results
RIIb expression was strongly reduced in Ca mutated CPAs, especially in tumors
harboring the frequent L206R mutation (nZ13, mean expression: 0.4G0.5 vs
1.5G0.7, p!0.05). Similar results were observed for RIa (1.8G0.9 vs 2.6G0.6,
p!0.05) but not for the other regulatory subunits. Ca levels were not influenced
by the mutations. mRNA expression of all subunits was unchanged in CPACa-wt
compared to CPACa-mut. Since no significant changes in mRNA expression were
observed, downregulation of RIIb and RIa seems a post-transcriptional event.
However, in NCI-H295R cells, proteasome inhibition did not save RIIb from
degradation, rendering other degradation pathways more likely. Furthermore, we
found different expression patterns of the PKA subunits in normal adrenal glands,
overlapping zoning, with low RIIb in the cortisol producing Z. fasciculata. The
expression pattern of PKA subunits in normal adrenal glands indicates possible
particular roles of these subunits on differentially regulating hormone secretion.
Conclusion
We demonstrate for the first time, that mutations in PKA Ca lead to post-
transcriptional downregulation of the main regulatory subunits in adrenocortical
tissues enhancing Ca catalytic activity leading to increased cortisol production.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP116
GP117
FSH supplementation increases the growth of PC-3 human prostate
cancer cell xenograft in gonadotropin-suppressed nude mice
Olayiwola Oduwole1, Ariel Poliandri2, Phil Rawson1, Nafis Rahman3,
Wolfgang Koechling4 & Ilpo Huhtaniemi1,3
1Imperial College London, London, UK;2Queen Mary University of
London, London, UK;3University of Turku, Turku, Finland;4Ferring
Pharmaceuticals A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Gonadotropin-releasing  hormone
(GnRH)  analogues  are  now  the  standard
hormonal  treatment  for  prostate  cancer.  A  fundamental  difference  between
GnRH agonist and antagonist treatment is the permanent suppression of both
gonadotropins (LH and FSH) by antagonist, while a rebound in FSH is associated
with agonist treatment. The benefits of antagonist include the immediate onset of
action  and  profound  long-term  suppression  of  FSH,  suggested  to  be  an
independent growth factor in prostate cancer. To determine the potential benefit
of permanent FSH ablation in treatment of prostate cancer, we studied the effect
of  the  GnRH  antagonist  degarelix,  in  the  presence  and  absence  of  FSH
supplementation, on androgen independent PC-3 human prostate cancer cell
xenograft tumour growth in intact and gonadectomised nude mice.
Our experiments demonstrate that degarelix treatment suppresses tumour growth
in both intact and gonadectomised nude mice compared to non-treated controls
(P!0.0001), indicating that the effect is mediated by gonadotropins rather than
androgen suppression. Degarelix also effectively suppressed LH and FSH in both
groups of mice, and testosterone in intact mice. The observed suppression of PC-3
cell xenograft tumour growth by degarelix treatment was significantly inhibited
by  concomitant  FSH  treatment.  Quantitative  polymerase  chain  reaction
demonstrated LHR and FSHR mRNA in the xenograft tumours, but not in
cultured PC-3 cells. Hence, in vivo conditions are needed for gonadotropin
receptor  expression  of  PC-3
cells.  In  conclusion,  we  provide  experimental
evidence that FSH may function as a direct growth promoter of prostate cancer
cells, suggesting that combined FSH and LH suppression by GnRH antagonist
could offer an advantage over the isolated LH suppression achieved by GnRH
agonist upon prostate cancer treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP117
GP118
Expression and regulation of the early embryonic stem cell genes in
parathyroid tumours
Chiara Verdelli1, Irene Forno2,3, Stefano Ferrero2,3, Vito Guarnieri4,
Alfredo Scillitani5, Filomena Cetani6, Leonardo Vicentini7, Gianni Balza8,
Edoardo Beretta9, Pasquale Creo10, Valentina Vaira2,3 & Sabrina Corbetta1
1Endocrinology Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health,
University of Milan, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese
(MI), Italy;2Department of Pathophysiology and Organ Transplantation,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy;3Division of Pathology, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy;4Medical
Genetics, IRCCS Hospital Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo (FG), Italy;5Endocrine Unit, IRCCS Hospital Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy;6Department of Endo-
crinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy;7Endocrine
Surgery, IRCCS Fondazione Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milan, Italy;8Endocrinology Unit, Ospedale Manzoni, Lecco, Italy;
9Endocrine Surgery, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy;
10Laboratory of Stem Cell for Tissue Engineering, IRCCS Policlinico San
Donato, San Donato Milanese (MI), Italy.
An embryonic gene signature has been suggested in parathyroid tumours. We
investigated  the  expression  of  early  embryonic  stem  cell
(ESC)  genes  in
parathyroid  tumours.  POU5F1/OCT4,  SOX2
and  NANOG  transcripts  were
detected in almost all parathyroid adenomas (PAds; nZ22) and atypical PAds
(nZ3),  besides  the  variable  expression  of  ESC  genes  KLF4,  EGR1,  and
REX1/ZFP42. OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG proteins expression were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in archival series of tumours and normal parathyroid
glands. Parathyroid carcinomas (nZ8) had more NANOG-expressing cells (mean
positive cells 40%) compared to PAds (nZ11; mean positive cells 10%), while
PAds (nZ22) showed a higher proportion of SOX2-expressing cells, though
SOX2-expressing  cells  occurred  in  half  of  tumours.  PAds-derived  cells
expressing the pluripotency genes were negative for PTH immunostaining. The
ESC  pluripotency  is  regulated  by  the  Wnt/b-catenin  and  by  the  bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMP) signalling. Active b-catenin highly accumulated
at membrane and cytoplasm levels in normal glands (nZ4) and in PAds (nZ16),
though PAds were heterogeneous showing parenchymal zones where cells had
very low active b-catenin levels confined at membrane. Despite the absence of
robust nuclear accumulation, b-catenin is transcriptionally active in parathyroid
neoplasia: treatment of PAds-derived cells
(nZ6) with 10-20 mM Lithium
Chloride increased the Wnt gene targets AXIN2, DKK1, ZEB1, and modulated the
expression of POU5F1/OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG mRNA levels depending on the
time course of b-catenin activation. Investigating samples from 25 PAds, we
observed that PAds expressing AXIN2 (nZ6) had abundant NANOG, SOX2 and
WNT5A transcripts. Moreover, stimulation of PAds-derived cells for 24 h with 50
and 100 nM BMP4 induced significant increases in ID1/inhibitor of DNA binding
1
(about threefold the basal levels) and Gremlin transcripts suggesting that PAds-
derived cells are responsive to BMP signalling. Nonetheless, any effect could be
detected on ESC genes transcripts levels by a short term BMP pathway activation.
In  conclusion,  parathyroid  tumour  cells  expressed  the  ESC  genes,  whose
expression might be modulated by deregulated b-catenin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP118
Neuroendocrinology
GP119
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1a triggers growth hormone synthesis in
acromegalic tumors
Kristin Lucia1, Jose Monteserin-Garcia1, Michael Buchfelder2,
Ulrich Renner1, Gunter Stalla1 & Marily Theodoropoulou1
1Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany;2Neurosurgical
Clinic, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
Acromegaly is caused by excessive growth hormone (GH) secretion frequently
due to GH-secreting pituitary tumors. Acromegalic tumors (ACRO) display
reduced microvascular density versus normal pituitaries, suggesting they are
under hypoxic conditions. Under hypoxia, tumors gain a survival advantage by
stabilizing the transcription factor known as hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha
(HIF1a). Western blot screening of ACRO (nZ40) revealed significantly higher
HIF1a protein levels compared to NFPA (nZ18) and normal pituitary (nZ6),
indicating a role for HIF1a specifically in acromegalic tumorigenesis.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
This study investigates the role of HIF1a in ACRO pathophysiology. HIF1a
overexpression and hypoxia (1% O2) increased GH secretion and promoter
activity in the GH-secreting GH3 cell line, while knocking down HIF1a blunted
these effects. GH transcription is positively regulated through the cAMP cascade,
which activates CREB and subsequently GH transcription. HIF1a overexpression
in GH3 cells maintained forskolin-induced CREB phosphorylation and increased
cAMP responsive element (CRE) transcriptional activity, while HIF1a knock-
down abrogated these effects. These effects were abolished by inhibiting CREB,
revealing the importance of CREB.
Further analysis revealed that the effects of HIF1a overexpression on GH and
CRE transcriptional activity were abrogated when HIF1a was co-expressed with a
dominant-negative mutant of PKA, indicating that the target of HIF1a is located
within,  or  upstream  of  PKA.  Real-time  PCR  screening  of  PKA-associated
proteins revealed the regulatory subunit IIb (PRKAR2B) as a probable HIF1a
target gene, as HIF1a overexpression significantly repressed PRKAR2B mRNA
expression,  while  HIF1a  knockdown  reversed  this  effect.  Furthermore,  the
stimulatory effects of HIF1a overexpression on GH promoter activity could be
suppressed by selectively overexpressing PRKAR2B.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that HIF1a overexpression as it is found
in somatotrophinomas is involved in the overactivation of the cAMP pathway
transcriptionally repressing the PRKAR2B subunit. Therefore, targeting HIF1a
may  sensitize  tumor  cells  to  pharmacological  therapy  in  patients  with
acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP119
GP120
High-resolution spatiotemporal analysis of Somatostatin Receptor Type
2
(SSTR2) - Filamin A (FLNA) interaction by single-molecule imaging
Donatella Treppiedi1, Giovanna Mantovani1, Erika Peverelli1,
Titiwat Sungkaworn2,3, Ulrike Zabel2,3, Elena Giardino1, Martin J Lohse2,3,
Anna Spada1 & Davide Calebiro2,3
1Endocrine Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico; Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy;2Institute of Pharmacology and
Toxicology and 3 Rudolf Virchow Center, Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft-Research Center for Experimental Biomedicine, University
of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany;3Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft-
Research Center for Experimental Biomedicine, University of Wurzburg,
Wurzburg, Germany.
SSTR2 is one of the main pharmacological target for GH-secreting pituitary
adenomas treatment and the cytoskeletal protein FLNA plays an important role in
tumor responsiveness by regulating SSTR2 expression and signaling. Single-
Molecule Imaging was used to investigate the spatial distribution of FLNA-
SSTR2 at the plasma membrane level and the involvement of FLNA in SSTR2
mobility, receptor clustering organization/internalization. This method is based
on labeling SNAP/CLIP-tagged proteins (SNAP-tagged SSTR2, CLIP-tagged
FLNA)  and  on  total  internal  reflection  fluorescence
(TIRF)  microscopy  to
visualize single particles on the surface of living cells. First, we observed dynamic
and transient FLNA-SSTR2 interactions along actin fibers in transfected CHO
cells. As far as SSTR2 mobility was concerned, no differences were found in
SSTR2 average speed between basal and 100 nM BIM23120 stimulated CHO
cells. However, an increase of the immobile receptors fraction (2.17%G0.21% vs
6.05%G0.69%)  has  been  observed  after  SSTR2
agonist  stimulation
(this
population of static receptor is the one that likely undergo internalization). To
evaluate the contribution of FLNA in the enrichment of the immobile SSTR2
population, we assessed experiments with the FLNA dominant negative mutant
that prevents SSTR2-FLNA binding (FLNA 19-20), but no differences were
found with respect to negative control (FLNA 17-18). This result was confirmed
in human melanoma cell lines M2 (FLNA-deficient) and A7 (FLNA-expressing).
In  conclusion,  the  spatiotemporal  behavior  of  SSTR2
and  SSTR2-FLNA
interactions have been characterized for the first time by means high-resolution
strategy. The interaction between FLNA and SSTR2 resulted to be extremely
dynamic along actin filaments, but FLNA does not seem to be involved in SSTR2
receptor mobility. Since SSTR2 tended to cluster on FLNA fibers in stimulated
cells, further experiments are required to better investigate the possible role of
FLNA in the regulation of SSTR2 clusterization/internalization processes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP120
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP121
Expression of dopamine (DA) D2 receptors (D2R) in corticotroph cells is
responsible for the switch of hypothalamic regulation of ACTH
secretion to DA in lactating rats
Gyorgy M. Nagy1, Palma Fehér2, Ibolya Bodnár3, Luke Reid1,
Zsuzsanna E. Tóth4, Miklós Vecsernyés2 & Bela E. Tóth2
1Ross University School of Medicine, Roseau, Dominica;2Faculty of
Pharmacy, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary;3EGIS Pharma-
ceuticals PLC, Budapest, Hungary;4Department of Anatomy, Histology and
Embryology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
Hypothalamic  regulation  of  pituitary  adrenocorticotropic  hormone
(ACTH)
secretion switches to dopamine (DA) with a parallel loss of DAerg control of
alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (a-MSH) release in lactating dams. It has
been also shown that dephosphorylation/inactivation of tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH) in terminals of DA neurons at the median eminence is required not only for
suckling-induced PRL release but also for ACTH responses. The aim of the
present study was to further investigate the regulatory switch of ACTH with
special emphasis on potential changes at the level of anterior lobe (AL) and the
neuro-intermediate lobes (NIL) of the pituitary gland in lactating rats. AL and
NIL cells obtained from ovariectomized (OVX) and lactating rats were cultured
in vitro. Levels of PRL, ACTH and a-MSH were measured by RIA from culture
media, with and without DA treatment. In cells obtained from OVX rats, ACTH
secretion was not sensitive to DA, but both PRL and a-MSH were blunted. In
contrast, on AL cells obtained from lactating rats, DA treatment resulted in an
inhibition in both PRL and ACTH secretion but had no effect on a-MSH. ACTH
immunohistochemistry  and  D2
DA  receptors
(D2R)  in  situ  hybridization
techniques  were  combined  to investigate whether  DA  inhibition  of  ACTH
secretion is due to the expression of D2R on corticotropes. It was found that
expression of D2R was much higher in both the AL and the NIL of lactating dams
compared  to  OVX  animals.  Combination  of  in  situ  hybridization  with
immunohistochemistry  revealed  co-localization  of  D2R  with  ACTH  in  a
subpopulation of corticotropic cells of lactating animals. Therefore, the release
of ACTH from corticotropes can be regulated by hypothalamic DA in lactating
animals. This subpopulation of cells may also be responsible for the higher basal
activity of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal system and the stress hyporespon-
siveness during lactation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP121
GP122
Lipid content and ATP metabolism in the liver of patients with
acromegaly
Yvonne Winhofer1, Peter Wolf1, Sabina Smajis1, Martin Krssak1,
Martin Gajdosik2, Alexander Micko3, Stefan Wolfsberger3,
Engelbert Knosp3, Greisa Vila1, Wolfgang Raber1, Siegfried Trattnig2,
Anton Luger1 & Michael Krebs1
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine III, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria;2Center of
Excellence High-Field MR, Department of Radiodiagnostics, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria;3Department of Neurosurgery,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
We  have  recently  shown  that  patients  with  growth  hormone
(GH)  excess
(acromegaly) exhibit inadequately low intrahepatic lipid content (IHL) despite
marked insulin resistance. GH might increase mitochondrial oxidation capacity
thereby counteracting ectopic lipid accumulation; however, up-regulation of
mitochondrial function has been reported in early stages of non-alcoholic fatty
liver  disease.  Up  to  now,  data  on  mitochondrial  activity  in  patients  with
acromegaly are missing.
Patient population and methods
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) for determination of ATP synthesis (k)
by the saturation transfer technique and IHL by 1H-MRS was performed in four
patients with active acromegaly (AKRO; two newly diagnosed, two uncontrolled
after surgery, 43G3 years, BMI: 31G3 kg/m2, IGF1: 715G128 ng/ml) and five
healthy controls matched for age and BMI (CON: 37G2 years, BMI: 31G
2 kg/m2).
Results
As expected, IHL was markedly lower in AKRO compared to CON (0.7G0.3 vs
4.6G.3%, PZ0.05). In contrast to our initial hypothesis, mitochondrial function
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
was  lower  in  AKRO
(ATP  synthesis
(k):
0.21G0.02
vs
0.33G0.02 1/s,
PZ0.003). In the whole group, IHL was tightly correlated with K (RZ0.78,
PZ0.014).
Discussion
Consistent with the suggestion that mitochondrial function of the liver adapts to
the prevailing lipid load, ATP synthesis was lower in patients with active
acromegaly and also low hepatic lipid content was observed in acromegaly
compared to matched controls. In contrast to short-term animal studies, GH
excess  does  not  up-regulate  hepatic  energy  metabolism  in  patients  with
GH-excess.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP122
GP123
A placebo-controlled study to assess the dose-effect of COR-005, a novel
somatostatin analogue on plasma glucose regulation compared to
octreotide in healthy male subjects
Klaus Kutz1, Manuel Haschke2, Christoph Beglinger2, Carsten Dehning3 &
Fredric Cohen4
1AccelPharm, Basel, Switzerland;2University Hospital Basel, Basel,
Switzerland;3Aspireo Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Tel Aviv, Israel;4Strongbridge
Biopharmaceuticals plc, Trevose, PA, USA.
Somatostatin  analogues
(SSAs)  approved  to  treat  acromegaly  tend  to
suppress postprandial insulin/glucagon secretion and can worsen glucose
tolerance. COR-005, a novel SSA, is under investigation for treatment of
acromegaly. In rodents, COR-005 effectively inhibits GH secretion with
10,000-fold greater potency compared with insulin release suppression. We
sought to determine for the first time the effects of COR-005 on postprandial
glucose in humans.
The pharmacodynamic effects of single subcutaneous doses of COR-005
300, 900, and 1800 mg, octreotide 300 mg and placebo on glucose, insulin
and glucagon dynamics were investigated for 4 h after intake of a mixed
meal in eight healthy male subjects using a randomized cross-over design.
Following  COR-005
300
and
900 mg,  there  were  slight  increases  in
maximum blood glucose concentrations (9.76G1.00 and 9.73G1.31 vs
7.56G0.93 mmol/l) and in the 4-h blood glucose AUECGlucose compared to
placebo (26.13G2.18, 28.86G3.82 vs 23.02G1.83 mmolxh/l). A higher
increase was observed after injection of COR-005 1800 mg and the highest
after  octreotide
300 mg
(AUECGlucose:
33.56G4.71
and
38.69G
5.79 mmolxh/l). Octreotide significantly suppressed plasma insulin and
glucagon  secretion  compared  to  placebo
(AUECInsulin
15.56G2.02  vs
44.29G10.65 mUxh/ml  and  AUECGlucagon
135.5G55.1
vs
363.2G
40.9 pgxh/ml) whereas COR-005 caused only a dose-dependent delay in
insulin and glucagon secretion but had no significant effect on AUECInsulin
or AUECGlucagon.
After intake of a mixed meal, COR-005 single doses up to 900 mg had no
significant effect on total insulin and glucagon secretion compared to
placebo and a marginal effect on blood glucose. COR-005 1800 mg less
strongly inhibited postprandial insulin and glucagon compared to octreotide.
COR-005 might offer a reduced risk of hyperglycemia relative to other SSAs
currently used to treat acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP123
GP124
Endothelial damage and thrombotic response in patients with cured
Cushing syndrome
Gloria Aranda Velazquez1,2, Mireia Mora Porta1,2, Irene Halperin1,2,
Rebeca Fernandez2, Maribel Díaz-Ricart3, Marta Palomo3, Oscar Vidal2,4,
Joaquim Ensen˜at5, Gregori Casals6 & Felicia Alexandra Hanzu1,2
1Endocrinology Department, HCB, Barcelona, Spain;2IDIBAPS-CIBER-
DEM, Barcelona, Spain;3Hemostasy Department, HCB, Barcelona, Spain;
4Endocrine Surgery, HCB, Barcelona, Spain;5Neurosurgery, HCB,
Barcelona, Spain;6Hormonal Laboratory, HCB, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction
Clinical  observational  studies  have  reported  the  persistence  of  a  high
cardiovascular risk in patients with cured Cushing’s syndrome (CCS) compared
with controls of the same age, gender and BMI. It is still at debated whether this is
due to the persistence of comorbidities, hormone deficiencies or chronic changes
induced by hypercortisolism. The aim of this translational approach was to
investigate the interplay in CCS of the cardiovascular disease in vivo and the
endothelial activation and thrombogenicity in vitro occurring in response to sera
of CCS.
Methods
Cross-sectional study in CS patients and controls and in vitro endothelial damage
atherothrombotic model. Subjects: I. Cured CS (CCS) (nZ10) at minimum
2 years after cure and without hormone deficiencies and II. Active CS (ACS)
(nZ10), III. Controls (CTR) (nZ10) matched for age, sex, sexual hormonal
status (females, premenopausal) and also by BMI and cardiometabolic profile.
We  evaluated  in  vivo:  the  cardiometabolic  clinical  and  analytical  profile;
endothelial dysfunction (FMD) and body composition (DEXA). Endothelial cells
(EC) were exposed for 24 h or have been cultured for 7 days with the different
seras (groups I, II, III) to evaluate the inflammatory EC response (VCAM, ICAM;
NfKB) and the reactivity (VWF) of the extracellular matrix (ECM).
Results
Active CS patients have a clinical, subclinical and in vitro proatherothrombotic
phenotype. EC exposed to CCS sera displayed augmented expression of ICAM1
(PZ0.04),  VCAM1  (PZ0.05),  a  higher  synthesis  of  sub-endothelial  VWF
(PZ0.03) and a higher EC reactivity towards circulating platelets: platelet
adhesion (PZ0.04) than CTRs of the same sex, age and BMI. NFkB is activated
downstream.
Conclusion
This is the first translational study demonstrating that the sera of patients with
cured CS have a deleterious atherothrombotic NFkB dependent potency on the
endothelium  inducing  endothelial  inflammatory  activation  and  increased
thrombogenicity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP124
GP125
Cabergoline therapy in clinically nonfunctioning pitutiary adenoma:
results of a clinical trial
Rafael Loch Batista1, Malebranche Cunha-Neto1, Nina Musolino1,
Clarissa Borba1, Valter Cescato1, Gilberto Silva1 & Ericka Trarbach2
1Neurosurgery Unit, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil;2Molecular Biology
Laboratiry, LIM 25, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
Nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas (NPA) are prevalent neoplams from pituitary.
The best treatment is the surgical approach but residual tumours are common. For
residual tumours the options are radiotherapy (RT) and re-surgery. There are no
significant studies testing drugs in NPA. Due to the fact that these tumors express
dopamine D2 receptors, dopamine agonists that may be useful in patients with
NPA.
Methods
We selected 145 patients with residual tumor after surgery and imunohistochem-
ical confirmation. Hormonal hypersecretion was excluded in all of them. RMI was
performed 6 months after surgery to confirm residual tumour. After this time, the
patients were randomized alternately in two groups: for cabergoline (Group A;
nZ74) or just clinical observation (Group B; nZ71). RMI was performed at
baseline  and  each
6 months  by  24  months.  Tumour  residual  volume  and
immunohistochemical expression was compared after 12 and 24 months. The
tumour volume was calculated according by Lundin and Peterson (cm3) and by a
software program (Osirix). Tumor shrinkage O25% of baseline was considered
significant. Any increase in tumor volume during follow-up was considered
relevant. Ecocardiography was performed as a safety measure.
Results
Group A (CAB) showed tumor reduction in 20.89% of patients and tumor
increase in 7.46%. Stabilization of residual tumour was observed in 71.64%. In
group B, reduction was observed in 4.91%, tumour progression in 16.39% and no
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
changes in 78.68%. Significant differences was observed in tumor reduction (AO
B; P!0.01) and tumor progression (BOA; PZ0.02). Stabilization was similar
between two groups (PZ0.4). No echocardiography alterations were observed
between  baseline,
12
and
24
months
(Ao,  Pulm,  Mitral,  Tric:  PZNS).
Imunohistochemical profile was not different between two groups and not related
to tumor progression or reduction.
Conclusions
Cabergoline was a effective alternative to radiotheraphy or resurgery in NPA.
Residual tumour reduction was observed in 1/5 of patients. The immunohisto-
chemical profile is not predictive of response to cabergoline. Cabergoline did not
show cause changes in heart valves in this study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP125
GP126
Abnormal hypothalamus and related brain regions in Prader-Willi
syndrome evaluated in vivo by diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)
Assumpta Caixàs1, Raquel Fenoll2, Jesús Pujol2, Marta Bueno3,
Susanna Esteba4, Laura Blanco-Hinojo2, Dídac Macià2, Ramon Novell4,
Ramon Coronas5, Olga Giménez-Palop1, Mercedes Rigla1 & Joan Deus6
1
Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí,
Institut de Recerca I3PT (UAB), Sabadell (Barcelona), Spain;2MRI
Research Unit, Hospital del Mar. CIBERSAM G21, Barcelona, Spain;
3
Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Arnau de Vilanova,
Lleida, Spain;4Mental Health and Intelectual Discapacity Specialized
Department, Parc Hospitalari Martí i Julià, Salt (Girona), Spain;5Mental
Health Department, Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut Recerca I3PT
(UAB), Sabadell (Barcelona), Spain;6Department of Clinical and Health
Psychology, UAB, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain.
Introduction
Prader-Willi  syndrome  is  a  genetic  disorder  characterized  by  hypotonia,
intellectual  disabilities, obesity and behavioral disturbance. Patients present
with  several  neuroendocrinological  abnormalities,  such  as  growth  hormone
deficiency, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and hyperphagia, as the result of
possible involvement of the hypothalamo-hypophyseal system. Diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) is a noninvasive MRI technique capable of providing quantitative
indices of brain structure integration. To our knowledge, there is only one study in
PWS patients using DTI and it was not focused in the hypothalamo-hypopshyseal
region.
Materials and methods
Twenty patients (11 males, 9 females, aged 28.3G7.4 years) with PWS and
twenty age- and gender-matched controls (11 males, 9 females, aged 28.1G7.0
years) were recruited. MRI data were acquired from all participants using a 1.5-
Tesla system. Diffusion-weighted scans were obtained using spin-echo single-
shot echo-planar sequences of 25 directions with a B-factor of 1000 s/mm2.
Images were preprocessed and fractional anisotropy (FA) maps were calculated
using Functional MRI of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library 5.0 (FSL).
Results
Based on a voxel-wise approach, we found a significant reduction in FA values in
a number of brain regions in PWS compared with controls. Relevantly, FA was
significantly  reduced  in the entire hypothalamus
(H) region and in nearby
structures including the lenticular nucleus (LN) (bilateral), amygdala (A), the sub-
genu part of the anterior cingulate cortex (CC) and the cranial-ventral aspect of
the striatum (S). R LN 79.9 ml, (x,y,z) 20, 4, -9, T5.00; L LN -23, 3, -12 T4.65;
H 4, -11, -3, T5.25; A -12, -8, -21, T5.61; AnteriorCCsub-genu, -5,17,-12, T4.80;
L cranial-ventral S -16, 22, -6, T4.17 and R cranial-ventral S 16, 21,-2, T4.31.
Conclusion
DTI results confirm the presence of an abnormal hypothalamus that could
contribute to explain endocrinological abnormalities and hyperphagia pathophy-
siology in these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP126
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP127
Hypothalamic GRK2, via GPR54, modulates puberty onset
Ma Soledad Avendan˜o1,2, Francisco Ruiz-Pino1,2, Ma Jesús Vázquez1,2,
Inmaculada Velasco1,2, Violeta Heras1,2, Encarni Torres1,2, Juan Manuel
Castellano1,2, Juan Roa1,2, Leonor Pinilla1,2 & Manuel Tena-Sempere1,2
1Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University
of Córdoba & Instituto Maimónides de Investigación Biomédica de
Córdoba/Hospital Universitario Reina Sofia (IMIBIC/ HURS), Cordoba,
Andalusia, Spain;2CIBER Fisio-patología de la Obesidad y Nutrición,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 14004, Cordoba, Andalusia, Spain.
The G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) kinase 2, GRK2, is a ubiquitous
serine/threonine protein kinase that is able to phosphorylate and desensitize
the active form of several GPCR. Compelling, as yet limited, evidence from
in vitro studies have suggested a potential role of GRK2 in mediating
desensitization of Gpr54, the canonical receptor for kisspeptins that is
abundantly expressed in GnRH neurons. Yet, although kisspeptins have
been universally recognized as essential regulators of puberty and fertility,
the physiological role of GRK2 in modulating kisspeptin signalling in vivo
remains completely unexplored. We report herein a series of expression and
functional analyses addressing the putative role of central (hypothalamic)
GRK2 in the regulation of puberty, as major developmental event under the
control of kisspeptins (and related factors). Expression analyses revealed a
gradual increase of GRK2 mRNA and protein levels in the hypothalamus
during postnatal maturation, especially in the preoptic area, where most
GnRH neurons reside. Of note, models of delayed puberty, due to postnatal
under-nutrition or manipulation of neonatal sex steroid milieu, displayed an
exaggerated  increase  of  hypothalamic  GRK2
expression.  In  addition,
intracerebro-ventricular (icv) injection of a GRK2 inhibitor enhanced LH
and FSH secretion in response to acute kisspeptin-10, but not to NKB,
administration. Furthermore, chronic icv administration of a GRK2 inhibitor
caused an advancement of puberty onset, evidenced by earlier vaginal
opening and first ovulation, together with increased ovarian and uterus
weights. Alike, central GRK2 inhibition partially rescued the delay in
puberty onset caused by postnatal under-nutrition. Altogether, our results
demonstrate that GRK2 regulates hypothalamic Gpr54 signalling in vivo
and provide conclusive evidence for a crucial role of GRK2 in the fine
tuning of pubertal timing, likely via modulation of kisspeptin actions, in
normal and metabolically or hormonally compromised conditions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP127
GP128
Latest results from the PATRO adults study of Omnitropew for the
treatment of adult patients with growth hormone deficiency
Paolo Beck-Peccoz1, Charlotte Hoybye2, Robert Murray3, Suat Simsek4,
Alfonso Leal-Cerro5, Markus Zabransky6 & Gunter Stalla7
1Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Caraterre Scientifico Ca Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy;2Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden;3The Leeds Teaching Hospitals, Leeds, UK;
4VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;5Instituto de
Biomedicina, Seville, Spain;6Sandoz International, Holzkirchen, Germany;
7Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.
Introduction
PATRO adults is an international, longitudinal, non-interventional study of the
long-term safety and efficacy of recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH;
Omnitropew, Sandoz). The study will provide additional data on the long-term
safety of rhGH in adult patients with severe GH deficiency (GHD). Here, we
present safety data from an interim analysis.
Methods
Eligible patients are adults who are receiving treatment with Omnitropew  and
have provided informed consent. Patients treated with another rhGH before
starting Omnitropew therapy are eligible for inclusion. The primary objective is to
assess the safety and efficacy of Omnitropew in adults treated in routine clinical
practice, with particular emphasis on the risk of glucose intolerance or diabetes
and normalisation of IGF-I levels.
Results
As of November 2015, 996 patients have been enrolled in the study; 548 (55%)
have received previous GH treatment. Mean (S.D.) age of subjects is 50.0 (15.2)
years, and mean (S.D.) BMI is 29.4 (6.1) kg/m2. To date, 1772 AEs have been
reported in 539 (54%) patients, with 273 (15%, in 164 [16.5%] patients) regarded
as serious. One-hundred-and-ten AEs (6%) in 67 (6.7%) patients were suspected
as  drug-related.  These  included
18
nervous  system  disorders,
17
general
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
disorders/administration site conditions,
16 musculoskeletal/connective tissue
disorders and two investigations (increased IGF levels). A total of 22 SAEs in
20
(2%) patients were suspected as related to Omnitropew treatment, including
one incidence of diabetes mellitus. Of the 127 patients who have discontinued
treatment, 31 did so due to an AE.
Conclusions
Based on this interim analysis, Omnitropew treatment in adults with GHD is well
tolerated in real-life clinical practice, both in rhGH-naïve and previously treated
patients. The PATRO adults study will continue to provide important data on the
diabetogenic potential and overall safety of long-term GH treatment in this
population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP128
Obesity
GP129
Direct effects of dopamine on mitochondrial thermogenesis in brown
adipocytes
Rose Kohlie, Nina Perwitz, Hendrik Lehnert, Johannes Klein &
Alexander Iwen
Internal Medicine I, Lubeck, Germany.
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is key in energy homeostasis. Catecholamines are
critically involved in the regulation of BAT-thermogenesis, yet current research
has focussed on noradrenaline and adrenaline. Some evidence suggests a role of
dopamine (DA) in BAT-thermogenesis but the intracellular mechanisms have not
been  addressed.  We  applied  our  extensively  characterised  murine  brown
adipocyte cell line to address these questions.
D1-like and D2-like receptors were detectable at the protein level, as determined
by immunoblotting. Treatment with DA caused an increase in cAMP levels.
Oxygen consumption rates and uncoupling protein 1 levels increased, whereas the
proton gradient at the inner mitochondrial membrane decreased after 24 h of
DA-treatment.  Mitochondrial  mass
(as  determined  by  measurement  of  two
mitochondrial proteins, TOMM20 and ATP synthase beta) also increased within
this period of time. This was accompanied by an increase of PPAR gamma
co-activator 1 alpha protein levels, a master regulator of mitochondrial mass. The
D1-like receptor antagonist SCH 23390, but not the D2-like receptor antagonist
Raclopride,  abolished  the  DA-effect  on  the  inner  mitochondrial  membrane
potential (Delta Psi). Similar to DA, the specific D1-like receptor agonist SKF
38393 had an effect on Delta Psi after 24 h, whereas bromocriptine, a D2-like
receptor agonist, had no significant effect. DA caused an increase of p38 MAPK
phosphorylation and pharmacological inhibition of p38 MAPK abolished the
DA-mediated effect on Delta Psi.
In summary, our study for the first reveals direct D1-like receptor and p38 MAPK-
mediated  increases  of  thermogenesis  and  mitochondrial  mass  in  brown
adipocytes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP129
GP130
Hypothalamic inflammation in humans is not reversed by a profound
weight loss and an improved insulin sensitivity due to bariatric surgery
Carina Kreutzer1, Sonke Peters2, Dominik Schulte1, Kathrin Turk1,
Stephan Wolff2, Axel Rohr2, Tina Kerby2, Christian Riedel2,
Thilo van Eimeren3, Stefan Schreiber1 & Matthias Laudes1
1University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Department of Internal
Medicine I, Kiel, Germany;2University Medical Center Schleswig-
Holstein, Department of Neuroradiology, Kiel, Germany;3University
Medical Center Cologne, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Cologne,
Germany.
Introduction
Obesity is associated with hypothalamic inflammation (HI) in animal models.
While MRI studies in humans also found an increased intensity in the MBH in
obese subjects, it remains unclear (1) if HI causes neuronal death and (2) if HI
reverses during weight loss.
Patients and methods
nZ50 obese subjects and nZ50 age- and sex-matched controls where examined.
MRI scans including spectroscopy were performed. Also, detailed nutritional
questionnaires, serum lipidomics, 16s rRNA microbiome sequencing data as well
as array-based genotyping data were obtained. nZ10 obese subjects underwent
bariatric surgery followed by a second MRI.
Results
Obese subjects exhibit an increased intensity in the left, but not the right MBH
compared to non-obese controls. The NAA/Cr ratio, a marker for neuronal cell
count in spectroscopy, did not differ between the two groups indicating that the
number of neurons might not be affected by the inflammatory process. After
bariatric surgery, BMI and HOMA showed a significant improvement in the mean
follow-up time of 3 months. However, the MRI intensity in the MBH did not
change in the same time period, suggesting that bariatric surgery might not
beneficially affect HI.
Conclusion
Obese human subjects exhibit an increased MRI intensity of the MBH suggesting
HI. While HI is not reversed by a significant weight loss due to bariatric surgery, the
finding that the number of neurons is not altered in the MBH by HI might suggest
that the function of the MBH in terms of appetite regulation might be reversible.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP130
GP131
The liver of obese patients with hepatic steatosis exhibits a severe
dysregulation of key splicing machinery components as compared to
obese patients without hepatic steatosis
Mercedes del Río-Moreno1, Sergio Pedraza-Arévalo1, Sandra González-
Rubio2, Gustavo Ferrín2, Manuel D Gahete1, Manuel Rodríguez-Perál-
varez2, Rhonda D Kineman3, Alejandro Iban˜ ez-Costa1, Manuel de la Mata2,
Justo P Castan˜o1 & Raúl M Luque1
1Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of
Córdoba, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía (HURS), Instituto Maimónides
de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC), CIBERobn, Córdoba,
Spain;2Department of Hepatology and Liver Transplantation, Reina Sofía
University Hospital, IMIBIC. CIBERehd, Córdoba, Spain;3Research and
Development Division, Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center and,
Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and
Metabolism, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Obesity, a disease that is growing at epidemic proportions worldwide, is caused
by a combination of genetic and lifestyle factors. One of the most common
pathologies associated with obesity is hepatic steatosis, an accumulation of fat
within the liver that can progress to liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, and ultimately lead to
hepatocellular carcinoma. There is emerging evidence that alternative mRNA
splicing,  the  key  mechanism  providing  transcript  and  protein  diversity,  is
dysregulated in many tissues under adverse metabolic conditions, such as obesity
and cancer. Moreover, the splicing variants generated within this process could
contribute  to  the  aggressiveness  and  comorbidities  of  these  diseases.  We
hypothesized that an alteration in the splicing machinery could occur in obese
patients with hepatic steatosis, which might ultimately be associated with the
progression to hepatic fibrosis/cirrhosis/carcinoma. To address this question, an
array of selected components of the major (nZ13) and minor spliceosome (nZ4),
and associated splicing factors (nZ28) was developed, and their expression levels
were evaluated using a Fluidigm methodology, in a series of liver samples from
obese (BMI O30) women with (nZ33) and without (nZ9) liver steatosis.
Results revealed that expression of a number of relevant splicing factors (SRSF2,
SND1, SRRM1, PTBP1, KHDRBS1) and spliceosome components (SF3Btv2,
U2AF1, U2AF2, RNU6) was altered in steatosis vs non-steatosis liver tissues.
Interestingly, some of these changes were associated with relevant clinical
parameters,  including  glucose  levels
(i.e.  SRSF2,  U2AF1/2,  KHDRBS1),
gamma-glutamyltransferase
(SRSF2,  U2AF1,  KHDRBS1),  HDL  (U2AF2,
SND1) as well as with insulin, cholesterol, creatinine and HOMA-IR (i.e.
RNU6). Finally, ROC analysis revealed that the expression of specific splicing
factors, especially SRSF2,  U2AF2,  PTBP1
and  RNU6,  can  clearly  predict
patients with or without hepatic steatosis. In conclusion, the expression of specific
splicing machinery components is significantly altered in the liver of obese
patients with hepatic steatosis. Ongoing studies would clarify the potential
pathological  implications  of  these  findings,  which  could  help  to  predict  a
worsening  in  steatosis,  and  may  provide  novel  diagnostic  biomarkers  and
therapeutic tools for this disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP131
GP132
The E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2 acts as a key determinant of hepatic
VLDL-triglycerides and ketone body production in obesity
Zhuohao Liu1,2, Aimin Xu1,2 & Kenneth K Y Cheng1,2
1The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong;2State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Obesity is a major risk factor for the development of hyperlipidemia and its
related cardiovascular complications. Apart from its well-established role in
cancer biology, the MDM2-p53 axis has been recently shown to regulate glucose
and lipid metabolism. Our preliminary data indicated that MDM2 is dramatically
induced in the liver of obese mice. In this study, we aimed to investigate the
potential role of hepatic MDM2 in controlling systemic lipid homeostasis using a
hepatocyte-specific MDM2 knockout (H-MDM2KO) mouse model.
Method
H-MDM2KO mice were generated by crossing MDM2floxed mice with transgenic
mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of albumin promoter. Eight-
week-old male H-MDM2KO mice and its WT littermates were fed with a
standard chow or a high fat high cholesterol (HFHC) diet for 24 weeks. Lipid
metabolism  and  energy  metabolism  were  measured  during  the
24-week
monitoring period.
Results
Genetic deletion of hepatic MDM2 led to elevation of p53 level in the liver.
H-MDM2KO mice and WT controls displayed similar body weight, lipid profile
and energy metabolism under standard chow feeding. Despite of similar body
weight  and  food  intake,  H-MDM2KO  mice  exacerbated  obesity-induced
hypertriglyceridemia and impaired fasting-induced ketogenesis when fed with
HFHC. The elevated triglyceride levels in H-MDM2KO mice was due to VLDL-
triglyceride production, whereas intestinal chylomicron-triglyceride synthesis or
VLDL-triglyceride clearance were normal. QPCR analysis revealed that the
genes involved in VLDL assembly such as ApoB and ketogenesis (HMGCL and
HMGCS2) were upregulated in the liver of H-MDM2KO mice, whereas genes
involved fatty acid oxidation (PPAR-alpha, MCAD and CPT1a) and lipogenesis
(SCREBP1c and Lipin-1) were unchanged when compared to its WT controls.
Conclusion
Our results indicated that MDM2 is a key player in controlling VLDL-triglyceride
secretion and ketogenesis, thereby maintaining lipid homeostasis. We will further
investigate whether these MDM2 actions are mediated by p53 in the future.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP132
GP133
The ubiquitin-like pathway neddylation controls adipocyte
differentiation, obesity and metabolism
Corinna Bauder1,2, Marta Labeur1, Annette Vogl1, Barbara Wolfel1,
Wolfgang Wurst2, Gunter Stalla1 & Damián Refojo1,3
1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munchen, Germany;2Helmholtz
Zentrum Munchen, Munchen, Germany;3IBioBA - CONICET - Partner
Institute of the Max Planck Society, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
The ubiquitin-proteasome cascade has been described as a critical factor in
adipocyte biology, insulin signaling and obesity, but the function of Nedd8, the
ubiquitin-like protein with the closest homology to ubiquitin, remains unknown.
Using
3T3-L1
preadipocyte  cells,  we  found  that  MLN-4924,  a  specific
neddylation inhibitor, blocks adipocyte differentiation. Screening for signaling
and transcriptional  factors  driving adipogenesis,  we found  that neddylation
blockade inhibits the expression of the master genes of adipogenesis, C/EBPa and
PPARg on RNA and protein levels. In 3T3-L1 mature adipocytes, MLN-4924
treatment reduced lipid droplets content without affecting lipolysis but fatty acids
uptake, a process maintained by enzymes transcriptionally controlled by PPARg.
In adipocytes, MLN-4924 also strongly reduced C/EBPa and PPARg expression
as well as the expression of multiple downstream targets of PPARg. Importantly,
the PPARg ligand, rosiglitazone reverted MLN-4924 effects on triglycerides lost.
In addition, we performed a preliminary in vivo study in WT mice chronically
treated  with  MLN-4924.  Pharmacological  blockade  of  neddylation  in  vivo
prevented  high  fat  diet
(HFD)-induced  body  weight  increase  and  reduced
adipocytes hypertrophy. Furthermore, conditional adipocyte-specific neddyla-
tion-deficient (Nae1Adipo-Cre-ERT2 KO) mice showed a decrease in body weight in
obese (HFD 4 months) mice accompanied by changes in glucose tolerance.
Altogether, these results suggest that the inactivation of Nedd8
in fat cell
precursors or mature adipocytes severely impairs adipocyte maturation and fat
storage respectively by reducing C/EBPa and PPARg levels.
Moreover,  these  observations demonstrate  that  neddylation,  a  new  post-
translational modification in adipocytes, is physiologically active in the regulation
of adipocyte development, biology and metabolism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP133
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP134
Prognostic factors and pathophysiology of diabetes remission after
metabolic gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy and greater curvature
plication: a randomized controlled trial
Nuria Vilarrasa1,2, Anna Casajoana3, Amador R de Gordejuela3,
Xavier Duran2,4, Joan Vendrell2,4, Sonia Fernández2,4, Pilar Garrido1,
Rosa Monseny1 & Jordi Pujol3
1Endocrinology Unit, Bellvitge University Hospital-IDIBELL, L’Hospi-
talet, Barcelona, Spain;2CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas
Asociadas, CIBERDEM, Spain;3General Surgery Unit. Bellvitge
University Hospital-IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet, Barcelona, Spain;
4Endocrinology Unit, Joan XXIII Hospital, Tarragona, Spain.
Introduction
39% of morbidly obese patients have type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and 80% of
them can achieve diabetes remission after bariatric surgery. However, there are
few randomized studies comparing the metabolic results of different surgical
techniques and the hormonal mechanisms involved.
Objective
To study and compare the improvement of T2DM and the hormonal pathways
following three surgical techniques: metabolic gastric bypass (mGBP), sleeve
gastrectomy (SG) and greater curvature plication (GCP).
Methods
Prospective, randomized controlled single-center study in patients with T2DM
and morbid obesity. 45 patients aged 49.4G7 years, BMI 39.4G1.9 kg/m2, initial
HbA1c
7.7G1.9%;  were  randomly  assigned
(1:1:1)  to  the  three  surgical
techniques. At baseline, one and 12 months a standard meal test was performed
to determine GLP-1, GLP-2, PYY, ghrelin and glucagon concentrations.
Results
Twelve months after surgery, total weight loss was higher in mGBP compared
with SG and GCP (K35.2G8.1 vs K27.8G5.4 vs K20.5G6.8 kg, PZ0.007,
P!0.001, respectively). HbA1c  at one year was significantly lower in mGBP
compared  with  SG  and  GCP  (5.09G0.62  vs  6.21G0.82  vs  6.61G1.30%,
PZ0.001, PZ0.001). The percentage of patients with diabetes remission was
higher in mGBP 80% vs 53.3% vs 20%. GLP-1 area under the curve (AUC) at
month one and 12 was greater in mGBP than after SG and GCP. In the multiple
regression analysis the absence of insulin treatment and the increase in GLP-1
AUC from baseline to month one were the factors associated with T2DM
remission.
Conclusions
mGBP is the technique that has shown a higher rate of weight loss and T2DM
remission. Factors associated with improved glycemic control are those that
accompany a less evolved diabetes, and an enhanced secretion of GLP-1.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP134
GP135
Ventilatory anaerobic threshold six months after RYGB
Snezana Polovina1,5, Ivana Nedeljekovic2,5, Djordje Bajec3,5,
Mirjana Sumarac-Dumanovic1,5, Dejan Radenkovic3,5,
Aleksandra Kendereški1,5, Pavle Gregoric4,5, Goran Cvijovic1,5,
Dusan Micic4, Svetlana Zoric1, Danica Stamenkovic-Pejkovic1,
Jelena Milin-Lazovic5, Danka Jeremic1, Ana Gligic1 & Dragan Micic5
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Diseases of Metabolism, Clinical
Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;2Clinic for Cardiology, Clinical Center
of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;3Clinic for Digestive Surgery, Clinical Center of
Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;4Emergency Center, Clinical Center of Serbia,
Belgrade, Serbia;5Medical Faculty, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,
Serbia.
Introduction
Obesity is associated with high risk for coronary artery disease, high blood
pressure, elevated serum cholesterol level, malignancy and Type 2 diabetes
mellitus. After weight loss, especially after bariatric surgery there is improvement
in blood pressure, metabolic parameters and ventilatory anaerobic threshold.
Material and methods
Ergospirometry (Shiller CS-200, Bruce protocol) was performed in 50 obese
patients  before  and  six  months  after  R  en  Y  gastric  bypass.  Baseline
characteristics were: BMI 43.8 kg/m2, 43G12.7 years of age (female nZ37,
male nZ13). Changes in pulse rate, systolic blood pressure (SBP) in rest and
maximal  SBP,  diastolic  blood  pressure  in  rest
(DBP)  and  maximal  DBP,
ventilatory anaerobic threshold (VAT/VO2) and peak in oxygen consumption
(VO2) were analyzed. Baseline VO2 less than 14 ml/kg per min was exclusion
criteria for bariatric surgery.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Results
Change  in  pulse  rate
(98.7G12.2
vs
88.01G13.46/min)  was  significant
(P!0.0001).  SBP  in  rest  decreased
(135G14  vs  131G13 mmHg)  with
significance PZ0.017. Max SBP decreased with high significance (181G26 vs
162G22 mmHg;  P!0.0001).  DBP  in  rest  also  decreased  (85G8  vs  80G
9 mmHg; P!0.0001) and max DBP decreased from 98G12 to 92G10 mmHg
(PZ0.002). There  was improvement in VAT/VO2 (17.8G3.44 vs 20.86G
4.70 ml/kg per min; P!0.0001) and in peak of oxygen consumption, VO2
(20.79G3.63 vs4.97G4.37 ml/kg per min; P!0.0001).
Conclusion
Our results suggest that bariatric surgery could improve cardiorespiratory fitness.
Ventilatory  anaerobic  threshold,  oxygen  consumption,  pulse  rate,  maximal
systolic and diastolic blood pressure as well as systolic and diastolic blood
pressure in rest were improved six months after RYGB.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP135
GP136
A novel human fetal brown stem cell functional model to study brown
adipogenesis
Alessandra Di Franco1, Daniele Guasti1, Roberta Squecco1,
Benedetta Mazzanti1, Francesca Rossi2, Eglantina Idrizaj1,
José Gallego-Escuredo3, Francesc Villarroya3, Daniele Bani1, Gianni Forti1,
Gabriella Barbara Vannelli1 & Michaela Luconi1
1University of Florence, Florence, Italy;2Institute of Applied Physics, Sesto
Fiorentino, Italy;3University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
The potential therapeutic applications of targeting brown adipose tissue open new
clinical avenues in fighting against metabolic pathologies. However, due to the
limited brown depots in adult humans, dramatically reduced after birth, solid cell
models to study human brown adipogenesis and its pathophysiological regulation
are urgently needed.
In our study, we characterized a novel human model of brown adipose stem cells,
hfB-ASC, derived from fetal interscapular brown fat depots. After demonstration
of the mesenchymal and stem nature of the isolated cells, we studied their
differentiation potential, in particular, towards the brown lineage. Following
in-vitro induced adipogenesis, these cells exhibit several features of brown fat
cells, such as the elevated expression of mature and early brown markers, UCP-1
and PRDM16, respectively (2KDDCt: 2295G864 and 19.3G8.0 for UCP-1 and
PRDM16), but not of white markers as leptin, compared to in-vitro differentiated
white adipose stem cells. They maintain also a specific intrinsic differentiation
program to functional brown adipocytes, and even spontaneously organize in
organoid  structures  with  brown  features.  Moreover,  for  the  first  time,  we
investigated the thermogenic and electrophysiological activity of the in-vitro-
derived fetal brown adipocytes compared to their undifferentiated hfB-ASC
precursors, in basal conditions and after acute administration of norepinephrine.
Compared to adipocytes obtained from in-vitro differentiation of white adipose
stem cells, brown adipocytes from hfB-ASC show a significantly increase in
temperature vs. undifferentiated cells (Dtemperature: 0.30 8CG0.10, PZ0.02), as
well as following acute administration of 10 mM norepinephrine (Dtemperature:
0.21 8CG0.20, PZ0.02).
In conclusion, starting from interscapular brown fat of human fetus, we developed
and functionally characterized a novel physiological brown adipose stem cell
model. This model may represent a unique opportunity for further studies on brown
adipogenesis processes in humans, as well as the most suitable target to develop
novel therapeutic approaches in order to stimulate brown activity in metabolic
pathologies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP136
GP137
Adipose tissue infiltration in normal-weight subjects and its impact on
metabolic function
Isabel Moreno-Indias1,2, Wilfredo Oliva-Olivera1,2, Daniel Castellano-
Castillo1,2, Said Lhamyani2, Jose Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1,3,
Maria Isabel Queipo-Ortun˜o1,2, Fernando Cardona-Diaz1,2 &
Francisco Tinahones1,3
1Biomedical Research Laboratory, Endocrinology Department, IBIMA,
Malaga, Spain;2Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in Physiopathology of
Obesity and Nutrition (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain;3Endocrinology
Department, Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital, Malaga, Spain.
Objectives
To study for the first time the differences in monocyte/macrophage infiltration,
inflammation and adipogenesis in the subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissues of
normal-weight subjects who differed in their degree of metabolic syndrome.
Methods
The study included 92 normal-weight subjects who differed in their degree of
metabolic  syndrome.  Anthropometric  and  biochemical  parameters  were
measured. RNA from subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissues was isolated,
and  mRNA  expression  of  monocyte/macrophage  infiltration
(CD68,  CD33,
ITGAM, CD163, EMR-1, CD206, MerTK, CD64, ITGAX), inflammation (IL6,
TNFa, IL10, IL1b, CCL2, CCL3) and adipogenic and lipogenic capacity markers
(PPARgamma, FABP4) were measured. Additionally, cells derived from stromal
vascular fraction from subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissues were isolated
and  expanded,  and  subsequently  differentiated  with  an  adipogenic  media,
measuring  the  mRNA  expression  of  adipogenesis
(PPARgamma,  FABP4,
ADRP, C/EBPalpha, LPL, LEP).
Results
Our data indicated a different degree of macrophage infiltration between adipose
tissues,  with  a  higher  monocyte/macrophage  infiltration  in  subcutaneous
adipose tissue in metabolically unhealthy normal-weight subjects, while visceral
adipose tissue remained almost unaffected. Moreover, adipogenesis function was
decreased in patients with the metabolic syndrome in subcutaneous adipose
tissue.
Conclusions
An increased macrophage infiltration of adipose tissue and its consequences, such
as a decrease in adipogenesis function, may explain why both obese and normal-
weight subjects can develop metabolic diseases or remain healthy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP137
GP138
Dietary and weight loss effects on human gut microbiome diversity and
metabolism
Daniela Fangmann1, Femke-Anouska Heinsen2, Dominik M Schulte1,
Malte-Christoph Ruhlemann2, Kathrin Turk1, Ute Settgast1, Nike Muller1,
Wolfgang Lieb3, John F Baines4, Stefan Schreiber1,2, Andre Franke2 &
Matthias Laudes1
1Department of Internal Medicine 1, University Hospital Schleswig
Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany;2Institute of Clinical Molecular
Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany;3Institute
for Epidemiology, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany;
4Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Plon, Germany.
Introduction
Changes in the gut microbiome have been associated with the development of
obesity. The aim of the present study was to examine i) the effect of a formula
based very-low-calorie weight loss diet (VLCD) on the gut microbiome of obese
humans  and  ii)  whether  if  potential  changes  are  sustained  during  weight
maintenance.
Patients and methods
The study consisted of 3 months VLCD (w800 kcal/d) followed by 3 months of
weight maintenance. 18 obese humans were examined (BMI 42.3 kg/m2 (35.2-
47.7)). A lean and an obese control group were included. Microbiome was
characterized by performing high-throughput dual-indexed 16S rDNA amplicon
sequencing of stool samples and subsequent analyses.
Results
At baseline, a difference in the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio was observed
(PZ0.047). The VLCD resulted in alterations in diversity from baseline to 3
months (PZ0.0053). Acinetobacter is an indicator species for the observed effect
(IndValZ0.998, PZ0.006). Metabolic analysis revealed significant alterations of
the bacterial riboflavin pathway from baseline to 3 months (PZ0.039). However,
the  changes  in  diversity  and  bacterial  metabolism  induced  by  the  VLCD
diminished during the weight maintenance phase, despite sustained reductions in
body weight and sustained improvements of insulin sensitivity.
Discussion
In obese humans a VLCD is able to beneficially alter both, gut microbiome
diversity and metabolism, but these changes are not sustained during weight
maintenance. This finding might in part explain the significant weight regain after
VLCD- based therapies and might suggest additional measures to target the
microbiome, e.g. fecal transplantation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.555161
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Paediatric Endocrinology & Development
GP139
2nd year efficacy results of once-weekly administration of CTP-
modified human growth hormone (MOD-4023): a phase 2 study in
children with growth hormone deficiency
Nataliya Zelinska1, Julia Skorodok2, Oleg Malievsky3, Ron G Rosenfeld4,
Zvi Zadik5, Ronit Koren6, Leanne Amitzi6, Oren Hershkovitz6, Gili Hart6 &
Klaudziya Radziuk7
1Ukrainian Children Specialized Clinical Hospital, Kyev, Ukraine;
2St Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St Petersburg, Russia;
3Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russia;4Oregon Health and
Science University, Oregon, USA;5Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel;
6OPKO Biologics, Nes Ziona, Israel;72nd Children City Clinic, Minsk,
Belarus.
Objective
Growth hormone (GH) replacement therapy currently requires daily injections.
This may cause poor compliance, inconvenience and distress for patients. CTP-
modified hGH (MOD-4023) has been developed for once-weekly administration
in growth hormone deficient (GHD) adults and children. The 18 and 24 month
efficacy of once-weekly subcutaneous (SC) administration of MOD-4023 was
evaluated in a Phase 2 study in children with GH deficiency.
Design and methods
A one year, randomized, controlled Phase 2 study was conducted in 53 pre-
pubertal children with GHD receiving once-weekly SC injections of one of three
MOD-4023  doses  (0.25,
0.48,  and
0.66 mg/kg  per  week)  vs  daily  hGH
(34 mg/kg/day). Forty-six subjects were rolled over to continue with the same
MOD-4023 dose in an open-label extension (OLE), which will routinely assess
growth until marketing approval. Height velocity (HV) results during the 2nd year
of MOD-4023 treatment for 45 patients were compared to historical controls (1).
IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 were monitored as well.
Results
The analysis included 2nd year height velocity data for 45 patients. All three
doses of MOD-4023 demonstrated promising 2nd year growth, while the two
higher doses of MOD-4023 resulted in better growth in comparison to the lower
dose of MOD-4023 (0.25 mg/kg per week), and in line with reported age- and
GHD severity-matched historical control (1).
Conclusions
The efficacy of single weekly administration of MOD-4023 for the treatment of
pediatric GHD patients was further confirmed during the 2nd year of treatment as
part of the OLE of a Phase 2 study. This further affirms that a single weekly
injection of MOD-4023 has the potential to replace daily hGH injections in
children with GHD and provides additional efficacy data to support dose selection
for OPKO’s upcoming Phase 3 trial.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP139
GP140
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: parents’ experiences of treating
their child’s condition
Amy Simpson & Amy Hunter
Genetic Alliance UK, London, UK.
Patients  with congenital  adrenal  hyperplasia
(CAH)  require  life-long, daily
glucocorticoid hormone replacement therapy. Currently, there is no licensed
treatment for young patients and existing treatment requires adapting adult doses
by crushing tablets. As primary caregivers, parents of young children with CAH
often take on the responsibility for routine medication and adapting doses in times
of stress or illness. There has been little research to date exploring parents’
experiences and the challenges associated with treating CAH. The study was
conducted by Genetic Alliance UK as part of the European Commission funded
TAIN (Treatment of Adrenal Insufficiency in Neonates) Project, which aims to
develop a new formulation of hydrocortisone for neonates and infants. Taking a
mixed methods approach, Genetic Alliance UK captured the views of parents
across three European countries. In 2014, 17 semi-structured interviews were
conducted in the UK and analysed thematically. In 2015, an online survey was
developed, piloted and disseminated widely to parents of children under the age of
six in the UK, The Netherlands and Germany. Although parents reported that their
child’s condition was relatively well managed, many described a number of
challenges associated with the treatment regime and made suggestions for how it
could be improved. Interviewees experienced a ‘latent anxiety’  as well  as
disruption to their sleep, their daily routines and their work life. Many of the
challenges were associated with the frequency of medication required and the
importance of getting the right dose at the right time. Challenges were particularly
acute for new parents when they left the supportive environment of the hospital.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
The study has provided a unique insight into the wider impact of managing CAH,
particularly from the perspective of parents. It has important implications for
treatment in the future, and for the care and support provided to CAH families.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP140
GP141
Genomics and phenomics of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and
dyshormonogenesis in hypothyroid children of South India
Panchangam Ramakanth Bhargav1 & B Ramesh2
1Endocare Hospital, Vijayawada, AP, India;2Mediciti Institute of Medical
Sciences, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
Background
Dyshormonogenetic  goiter  and  Hashimoto’s  thyroiditis  are  amongst  the
commonest causes of hypothyroidism in children and adolescents Worldwide.
But, the genetic basis and their hypothyroid phenotypes are under-reported,
especially  from  developing  countries.  In  this  context,  we  screened  for
dyshormonogenetic mutations in hypothyroid children with dyshormogenetic
goiter (DH) and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT).
Material and methods
In  this  prospective  multidisciplinary  study,  blood  DNA  of
42  hypothyroid
children with dyshormogenetic goiter (DH) and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT)
were studied with direct sequencing analysis for NIS, DUOX2 and TPO gene
mutations. Detailed clinical, biochemical and follow-up data were analysed.
Results
Mean age of children was 11.35G2.03 years (5-18). In the entire cohort, we
detected 17/42 (40.4%) thyroid specific mutations. In HT, we detected eight
mutations in 7/20 (35%) children of this cohort (six in NIS and two in Tpo genes).
In DH, nine mutations in 8/22 (36%) children were detected. No mutations were
observed in Duox2 gene. All our mutations were localized in introns. Except for
two homozygous polymorphisms, all other mutations were heterozygous in
nature.  Genotype-phenotype  correlations  shows  statistically  significant
expression of autoimmune manifestations, goiter rate and positive family history.
Conclusions
NIS gene mutations were the most prevalent mutations in both HT and DH
amongst South Indian children in this study. These mutations significantly
influenced hypothyroid phenotypic traits such as severity of hypothyroidism,
goiter rate, autoimmune associations and positive family history. More studies
from  varied  geographic  zones  are  needed  to  risk  categorise  hypothyroid
phenotypes in children.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP141
GP142
Association between urinary magnesium and glycaemic control in
children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus
Filipe Cunha1, Juliana Oliveira2, Ana Saavedra1, Inês Alves1, Rita Santos-
Silva1, Carla Costa3, Cíntia Castro-Correia3 & Manuel Fontoura3
1Serviço de Endocrinologia, Diabetes e Metabolismo do Centro Hospitalar
de São João, Porto, Portugal;2Servic¸o de Pediatria do Centro Hospitalar de
Sa˜o João, Porto, Portugal;3Unidade de Endocrinologia Pediátrica do
Servic¸o de Pediatria do Centro Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal.
Background
Hypomagnesemia is common in patients with diabetes; possibly due to higher
renal magnesium excretion in those patients. Hypomagnesemia seems to correlate
with  poor  glycaemic  control.  The  relationship  between  urinary  magnesium
(UMg) and glycaemic control is not known. We aimed to study the association
between UMg and glycaemic control in a type 1 diabetes (T1D) pediatric
population.
Methods
Study of a pediatric population with T1D attending the Pediatric Endocrinology
Clinic at Hospital de São João, Porto, between May 2014 and April 2015. We
prospectively included all patients with UMg in a first-morning-void urine
sample. Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) was measured in a capilar blood sample
using DCA 2000 analyser. Patients with good and poor glycaemic control (cut-off
used: 7.5%) were compared. We studied the correlation between UMg and
HbA1c using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. A multivariate logistic
regression model was built to study predictors of poor glycaemic control.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Results
We studied 48 patients. Mean age was 12G4 years and 58.3% were male. Mean
duration of T1D was 88G43 months and mean HbA1c was 8.4G1.4%. Median
(IQR) UMg was 8.46 (5.36-12.33) mEq/l. Twelve patients (25%) had good
glycaemic control. Patients with good glycaemic control were more frequently on
Continuous Subcutaneous Insulin Infusion (CSII) (7 (58.3%) vs 7 (19.4%);
PZ0.02) and had lower UMg (5.6 (3.1-7.7) vs 9.4 (6.8-12.4) mEq/l; PZ0.01).
There were no differences in serum magnesium levels. UMg had a weak positive
correlation  with  HbA1c
(rZ0.30;  PZ0.04)  and  T1D  duration
(rZ0.28;
PZ0.05). UMg was a predictor of poor glycaemic control OR: 1.40 (95% CI:
1.05-1.85), PZ0.02; independent of age, T1D duration and CSII use.
Conclusions
UMg is an independent predictor of poor glycaemic control. Per each mEq/l
increase of UMg there is a 40% higher risk of poor glycaemic control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP142
GP143
Adolescent girls with hyperandrogenism - epidemiology and clinical
features
Olga Gumeniuk & Yuriy Chernenkov
Saratov State Medical University, Saratov, Russia.
Hyperandrogenism in adolescent girls is medical and social problem, including
hirsutism, seborrhea, severe acne, alopecia and hyperclitoridism.
Purpose
To study the frequency and clinical peculiarities of the hyperandrogenism (HA) in
adolescent girls.
Patients and methods
The study included 2369 girls (aged 11-19 years). Patients were subjected to the
clinical examination, ultrasound examination. Index of hyperandrogenism (HAI)
were calculated (the Ferriman-Gallwey score).
Results
The investigation shows that 341 (14%) girls had HA. In 100% adolescents with
HA  had  acne,  seborrhea  and  menstrual  disorders.  Results  showed  that
dysmenorrhea  (99%)  and hypermenstrual syndrome  (80%) highly  prevalent
among patients with HA. Girls with HA observed median Ferriman-Gallwey
scores of 13 (range: 7-18). The macromastia was found in 20 (9%), breast
hypoplasia in two girls. The dysplasia of mammary glands (mastopathy) was
diagnosed  in  all  patients  with  macromastia.  The  morbid  obesity
(BMIS40 kg/m2) was diagnosed in 26 (8%) girls with HAI O12. In 99%
adolescents with HA was found ultrasound signs multifollicular ovaries, in two
girls had ultrasound signs polycystic ovary syndrome.
Conclusions
This study has shown that HA have been diagnosed in every tenth adolescent
girls. The clinical features in girls with HA were hirsutism, menstrual disorders
and  multifollicular  ovaries.  The  multifollicular  ovaries  in  adolescents  are
indication for observation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP143
GP144
Leptin directly stimulates parathyroid hormone secretion
Ignacio Lopez1, Carmen Pineda1, Ana I Raya1, Maria E Rodriguez-Ortiz2,
Juan M Diaz-Tocados3, Rafel Rios1, Mariano Rodriguez3,
Escolastico Aguilera-Tejero1 & Yolanda Almaden4
1Department Medicina y Cirugía Animal, Universidad de Córdoba,
Cordoba, Spain;2Laboratorio de Nefrología. Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain;3Unidad de Investigación
y Servicio de Nefrología (Red in Ren), Instituto Maimónides de
Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba/Hospital Universitario Reina Sofia,
Cordoba, Spain;4Unidad de Lípidos y Aterosclerosis. IMIBIC/Hospital
Universitario Reina Sofía, Cordoba, Spain.
A relationship  between  obesity,  plasma  leptin  concentration  and  primary
hyperparathyroidism has been previously reported. To test the hypothesis that
leptin directly stimulates parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion, in vivo and
in vitro experiments were conducted. In the in vivo studies leptin (200 mg/kg, ip)
was administered to lean and obese (mutants that do not express active leptin
receptor) Zucker rats. The in vitro experiments were carried out by exposing rat
parathyroid glands to increasing concentrations of leptin (0, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2 and
4 mg/ml). After leptin administration, PTH increased progressively in the lean but
not in the obese rats reaching a maximum at 60 min (from 34.5G3.7 pg/ml to
113.9G23 pg/ml, PZ0.01) and then returned to baseline by 180 min. Changes in
PTH after leptin administration were not associated with changes in 1,25(OH)2-
vitamin  D,  fibroblastic  growth  factor
23
(FGF23),  calcium  or  phosphorus.
Moreover, in vitro, a dose-dependent increase in PTH secretion that started at
leptinZ0.25 mg/ml and kept rising until reaching a zenith at leptinZ2 mg/ml was
identified. In conclusion, the results of the present study demonstrate a direct
stimulatory effect of leptin on PTH secretion and suggest the existence of an
endocrine axis between adipose tissue, where leptin is mainly produced, and the
parathyroid glands.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP144
GP145
Impact of fetal exposure to testosterone on fetal insulin sensitivity
tissues - a morphological and molecular approach
Daniel Sandoval1, Monica P Recabarren1, Albert Carrasco1, Daniela Rojas1,
Alonso Montalban1, Teresa Sir-Petermann2 & Sergio E Recabarren1
1University of Concepcion, Chillan, Chile;2University of Chile, Santiago,
Chile.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common cause of infertility in
reproductive aged women affecting w5-10% of women of reproductive age
worldwide. PCOS patients are characterized by infertility disorders, obesity,
insulin resistance and hyperandrogenemia that persists during pregnancy. This
finding allowed to suggest the hypothesis that this intrauterine environment could
affect the fetus, reprogramming the insulin sensitivity of the offspring. We have
developed an ovine model to study the reprogramming effect of testosterone (T)
during pregnancy in order to emulate the hyperandrogenemia observed in PCO
pregnant mothers. The objective of this work was to assess the morphometry of
fetal tissues and the mRNA expression of key molecules in the insulin pathway of
insulin sensitivity tissues in ovine female fetal tissues exposed to T in utero.
Pregnant Suffolk-down sheep were treated with 30 mg T propionate twice weekly
from day 30-90 of pregnancy and 40 mg from day 90 to 120 of pregnancy.
Pregnant control sheep received the vehicle of T. At 120 days of pregnancy and
under bioethical procedures, female fetuses were obtained by cesarean surgery.
Fetal skeletal muscle, visceral adipose tissue and pancreas were collected for
morphological (HE and NADH-Tr stain) and RNA expression of insulin receptor
(IR), insulin receptor substrate 1 and 2 (IRS-1, 2), AKT, PKC and glucose
transporters (GLUT2 and GLUT4). Control and T- fetuses showed similar pattern
in the development of skeletal muscle (number of fibers, CSA and proportional
phenotype of fibers),  adipose  tissue
(area and perimeter of  adipocyte)  and
pancreas (islet area and number of islets). On the other hand, there was higher
expression of IR signaling factors and GLUT2 and GLUT4 in pancreas. These
results provide evidence that T induces transcriptional activation of insulin
signaling  in  our  animal  model  of  PCOS  without  effect  on  morphological
organogenesis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP145
GP146
Breast development in male-to-female transgender patients after one
year cross-sex hormonal treatment
Christel de Blok, Maartje Klaver, Nienke Nota, Marieke Dekker &
Martin den Heijer
VU University Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Background
In male to female transgender patients breast development is a key part in the
process of feminization using cross sex hormone therapy. In the Endocrine
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Society’s clinical guideline ‘Endocrine treatment of transsexual persons’ the
onset of breast growth is estimated as 3-6 months after starting cross sex hormone
treatment. The maximum breast growth however is seen after 2-3 years. But how
much growth, in centimeters or cup-sizes, we can expect is not clear. With this in
mind we want to objectify the breast growth after one year of cross sex hormone
treatment in male to female transgender patients.
Objective
To examine the absolute increase in breast circumference corrected for chest
circumference in male to female transgender subjects included in the ENIGI
database who are treated with cross sex hormone therapy for 1 year.
Methods
All male to female transgender subjects included in the ENIGI database who have
been treated with cross sex hormones for 1 year are eligible for this study.
According to the ENIGI protocol patients are examined in the outpatient clinic
every 3 months. During this outpatient clinic visits several features are examined
and measured including breast and chest circumference. Missing values we
imputed with multiple imputation(ICE) in Stata.
Results
One-hundred-forty-two male to female subjects are eligible for this study. Mean
breast circumference increased from 93.9 (S.D. 11.6) cm to 97.2 (11.1), while
chest circumference remained stable (88.6 (10.7) cm). The mean difference
between  breast  and  chest  diameter  after  one  year  was
7.5
(3.0)  cm.  This
implicated a C-cup (16-18 cm) in 2%, B-cup (14-16) in 4%, A-cup (12-14) in 8%
and AA-cup (10-12) in 10% of the patients. After 1 year, 76% had a breast-chest
difference smaller than 10 cm.
Conclusions
Our study shows a modest breast development after 1 year. Future studies need to
determine whether breast circumference is an accurate method to estimate breast
development during cross sex hormone treatment and what the effects are on
longer treatment. Furthermore, a topic of interest is which factors influence breast
development in transgender treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP146
GP147
Prenatal metformin treatment prevents estradiol increase and partially
improves ovarian function in offspring of obese mothers
Daniela Álvarez, Sofía Olguín, Karina Ceballo, Jonathan Martinez,
Tania Cerda, Daniela Fernandois & Gonzalo Cruz
Laboratorio de Alteraciones Reproductivas y metabolicas. CNPC. Instituto
de Fisiología. Facultad de Ciencias. Universidad de Valparaíso, Valparaíso,
Chile.
Obesity epidemic is one of the major concerns in the world. Worryingly, a high
percentage  of  pregnant  women  have  obesity,  which  could  imply  several
consequences. Maternal obesity leads to different abnormalities in pregnancy
and delivery. In addition, recent studies show that the offspring of obese mothers
has an increased probability to suffer cardiovascular, metabolic and reproductive
diseases. We have previously demonstrated that exposure to a high fat diet is
related to obesity, liver dysfunction, increased serum estradiol, advanced puberty
and ovarian follicular alterations in the progeny. We aimed to determine if
metformin prevents this developmental reprogramming produced by a high fat
diet exposure. Sprague Dawley rats were distributed in three groups: Control diet
(13% Kcal in fat); High Fat Diet (HF) (60% Kcal in fat, Research Diet, USA) and
HFC Metformin (60% Kcal in fat C metformin 150-200 mg/kg in tap water).
Diet was administered for 1 month previous to pregnancy, during pregnancy and
nursing. Metformin was administered from 1 week previous to pregnancy until
weaning of the offspring. Metformin did not affect the weight gain during
pregnancy and failed in prevent increased weight in offspring of obese mothers.
At postnatal day (PND) 14 metformin tended to prevent the estradiol increase
while  at  PND60
metformin  significantly  prevented  the  estradiol  increase.
Coherently, hepatic CYP3A2 (enzyme that metabolizes estradiol) decreased in
offspring obese mothers and this decrease was prevented by metformin treatment.
The generation of ovarian cyst was also prevented by metformin in offspring of
obese mothers. In conclusion, metformin prevented some reproductive alterations
triggered by maternal obesity on the offspring.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP147
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP148
Adrenal dysregulation in children who were born extremely premature
- a pilot study
Carmen Campino1,5, Alejandro Martinez-Aguayo2, Rene Baudrand2,
Cristian Carvajal1,5, Hernan Garcia2, Marlene Aglony2, Rodrigo Bancalari2,
Lorena Garcia3, Carolina Loureiro2, Andrea Vecchiola1,5, Alejandra Tapia1,
Carolina Valdivia1,5, Cristobal Fuentes1, Carlos Lagos1,5, Sandra Solari4,
Fidel Allende4, Alexis Kalergis5,6 & Carlos Fardella1,5
1Dpto Endocrinologia, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad
Catolica de Chile, Santiago, Chile;2Division Pediatria, Facultad de
Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Santiago, Chile;3Depto
de Bioquimica and Biologia Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Quimicas y
Farmaceticas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile;4Depto de Labor-
atorios Clinicos, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de
Chile, Santiago, Chile;5Instituto Milenio de Inmunologia e Inmunoterapia,
Santiago, Chile;6Depto de Genetica Molecular and Microbiologia, Facultad
de Ciencias Biologicas, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Santiago,
Chile.
Introduction
The prevalence of hypertension in children and adolescent who were extremely
preterm newborns (EP; %32 gestational weeks) has been found to be higher than
in those born at term. The causes have not been well characterized. Studies
support that adrenal dysregulation might be a consequence of prematurity.
Objectives
To determinate if children who were EP had higher adrenal hormones and
vascular remodeling biomarker than term newborn (R38 gestational weeks).
Design, subjects and methods
A pilot - cross sectional study was design. Children from the community were
invited (nZ235, range 5.1-15.5 years old); twelve were EP (gestational age
between 30 and 32 weeks) and 223 were born at term (gestational age between 38
and 40 weeks). Anthropometric characteristics and aldosterone, plasma renin
activity
(PRA),  aldosterone/PRA  ratio
(ARR),  cortisol  and  cortisone  were
measured. Metalloproteinasa 2 (MMP-2) activity was measured as a vascular
remodeling biomarker.
Results (median)
Both groups were comparables in age (10.2 vs 11.6 years; PZ0.075), BMI-SDS
(1.13
vs 1.18; PZ0.434), height-SDS (0.48 vs 0.23; PZ0.434) and blood
pressure corrected by gender, age and height
(systolic index
1.09 vs 1.06,
PZ0.184 and diastolic index 1.11 vs 1.10 PZ0.797). EP newborn vs term
newborn showed similar aldosterone (ng/dl): 7.6 vs 6.2 (PZ0.439) and PRA
(ng/ml per h): 2.16 vs 2.3 (PZ0.779) but higher ARR (3.9 vs 2.6 PZ0.039) and
higher MMP-2 activity (Arbitrary units): 1.88 vs 1.50 (PZ0.009). No statistical
differences in cortisol, cortisone and cortisol/cortisone ratio were observed.
Conclusions
This pilot study showed that children who were extremely preterm newborn have
higher ARR and vascular remodeling than children born at term, despite similar
blood pressure. Future studies to assess the importance of these findings in early
prevention of hypertension are warranted.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP148
Pituitary - Clinical
GP149
Impact of AIP and Gai-2 proteins on clinical features of sporadic
GH-secreting pituitary adenomas
Elina Ritvonen1, Esa Pitkänen3, Atte Karppinen2, Satu Vehkavaara1,
Hande Demir3, Anders Paetau4, Camilla Schalin-Jantti1 & Auli Karhu3
1Endocrinology, Abdominal Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland;2Department of Neurosur-
gery, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland;3Department
of Medical and Clinical Genetics & Genome-Scale Biology, Research
Programs Unit, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;4Department of
Pathology, HUSLAB, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Introduction
In  sporadic  acromegaly,  downregulation  of  AIP  protein  of  the  adenomas
associates with invasive tumour features and reduced response to somatostatin
analogue treatment. AIP is a regulator of Gai signaling, but it is not known how
the biological function of the Gai pathway is controlled.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Aim
To study somatic GNAS and AIP mutation status, AIP and Gai-2 protein
expressions, Ki67 proliferation indices, and clinical parameters in patients having
primary surgery because of acromegaly at a single centre between years 2000 and
2010.
Results
Sixty patients (F/M 31/29, mean age 49 (median 50), mean follow-up 7.7 (range
0.6-14.0) years) underwent primary surgery. Of the 60 adenoma specimens, four
(6.8%) harboured an AIP and 21 (35%) an activating GNAS (GspC) mutation.
All adenomas stained positive for Gai-2, and 55/56 AIP mutation negative
adenomas stained positive for AIP protein. Altogether 13/56 (23%) adenomas had
low AIP protein levels, and 14/56 (25%) low Gai-2 staining. A regression model
including Gai-2, Ki 67 proliferation indices and GH (measured 3 months after
surgery), best explained the variance in the AIP protein level (PZ6.03!10K9).
The majority (43%) was explained by Gai-2 level only. GspC status was not
related to AIP or Gai-2 protein levels, but associated with lower KNOSP grade
(PZ0.0018, rZ0.332), tumours restricted to the sella (PZ0.026, rZ0.320), and
higher preoperative prolactin concentrations (PZ0.0017, rZ0.032). However,
the associations were not significant after correction for multiple testing.
Conclusions
We demonstrate, for the first time, that AIP protein expression associates with
Gai-2 protein intensities in sporadic somatotropinomas. This may indicate a
synergetic effect on somatostatin signaling. Low AIP protein levels associate with
higher proliferation activity and higher postoperative serum GH, indicating more
aggressive adenomas. The AIP mutation rate of 6.8% is fairly high and probably
reflects the genetic composition of the Finnish population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP149
GP150
Treatment of acromegaly increases BMD but reduces Trabecular Bone
Score - a longitudinal study
Kristin Godang1, Nicoleta Cristina Olarescu1, Jens Bollerslev1,2 &
Ansgar Heck1,2
1Section of Specialized Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, Oslo
University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway;2Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
Background
Bone turnover is increased in active acromegaly. Despite normalization of bone
turnover  after  treatment, the  risk for  vertebral  fractures  remains increased.
Gonadal status, but not bone mineral density (BMD) is correlated to vertebral
fracture incidence. Trabecular and cortical bone are differentially affected by GH
and IGF-1. The trabecular bone score (TBS) is related to bone microarchitecture
and provides further information not captured by BMD measurement.
Methods
This longitudinal study included 38 patients with acromegaly consecutively
recruited between 2005 and 2015. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
scans and blood samples for measuring bone turnover (PINP, CTX1) were
acquired at baseline and 1 year after transsphenoidal surgery. TBS was analysed
at L1-L4 with TBS iNsight software.
Results
Following treatment, the mean TBS decreased by 3.0% (G7.0), from 1.33
(G0.15) to 1.29 (G0.14); PZ0.007, whereas BMD L1-L4 increased by 3.2%
(G4.9) from 1.20 (G0.19) to 1.24 (G0.20) g/cm2; P!0.001. The changes in
BMD and TBS were not correlated (PZ0.87).
TBS change in men was -4.5% (G6.7%; PZ0.003) and in women -0.3%
(G6.8%; PZ0.85). There was a trend towards a difference in changes between
men vs women (PZ0.063).
Mean BMD L1-L4 increased in men C0.050 (G0.051; P!0.001, but not in
women C0.016 (G0.061; PZ0.36) g/cm2, (PZ0.073 for interaction depending
on gender).
BMD increased in ultradistal radius and total body (all P!0.01). The increase of
BMD was associated with a decrease in PINP and CTX1 (P!0.001) and with
lower levels of PINP and CTX1 at follow-up (P!0.02).
Conclusion
Treatment of acromegaly impacts TBS and BMD at L1-L4 in different manners.
The reduction of bone turnover markers predicts the increase in BMD. The DXA
changes in bone parameters were more pronounced in men. Alterations in
trabecular bone architecture may explain the persistent fracture risk despite the
increase in BMD after disease control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP150
GP151
Longitudinal assessment of response to treatment with oral octreotide
capsules in patients with acromegaly: post-hoc analysis of a phase 3 trial
Maria Fleseriu1, Shlomo Melmed2, Brian Mangal3, Christian J Strasburger4
& Nienke R Biermasz5
1Department of Neurological Surgery and Medicine, Northwest Pituitary
Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA;
2Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California, USA;3Wave Analytics Group, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada;4Departement of Endocrinology, Charite-Universitatsmedizin,
Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany;5Department of Endocrinology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Introduction
Although biochemical markers of acromegaly disease activity, including GH and
IGF1, may fluctuate from day-to-day, biochemical treatment response in clinical
trials  is  generally  monitored  using  single-point  analyses.  Accordingly,
longitudinal evaluations may assess patient status more accurately. In a phase 3
trial, oral octreotide capsules (OOC) demonstrated sustained composite endpoint
GH and IGF1 response for %13 months in 151 patients with acromegaly
previously managed with somatostatin analog injections (IGF1!1.3! ULN and
GH!2.5 ng/ml). Here we report longitudinal IGF1 and GH analyses from this
trial.
Methods
Trial design comprised core (dose escalation [DE] C fixed dose [FD]; %7
months) and extension (%13 months) periods. IGF1 was assessed monthly; mean
integrated GH was assessed upon up-titration and at the beginning and end of each
period. For the primary study endpoint, response was determined by a composite
including IGF1 and GH at End-of-Treatment (EoT). In this post hoc analysis,
longitudinal IGF1 and GH are expressed as time-weighted average (TWA)
incorporating all measurements; response is defined as a composite including
TWA IGF1!1.3! ULN and TWA GH!2.5 ng/ml.
Results
At end of core period, 108/151 patients (72%) achieved response by TWA, vs
98/151 (65%) per initial EoT composite endpoint analysis. Of patients who
entered FD (nZ110), 88 (80%) completed the core period (7 months) and
achieved response by TWA, vs 82/110 (75%) per EoT analysis. Of patients who
entered FD as responders by protocol (nZ91), 86 (95%) maintained TWA
response through extension (%13 months), vs 77/91 (85%) per EoT analysis.
Conclusions
Based on a composite using TWA IGF1 and TWA GH, OOC demonstrated a
greater response vs the single-point analysis at EoT. Analyses incorporating all
evaluations may provide more accurate and clinically meaningful assessments of
overall treatment response than single-point evaluations. Therefore, ongoing
studies using OOC evaluate response using all evaluations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP151
GP152
Effects of hydrocortisone substitution on blood pressure - results from
an RCT
Jorien Werumeus Buning1, Martijn van Faassen2, Pauline Brummelman1,
Robin P F Dullaart1, Gerrit van den Berg1, Melanie M van der Klauw1,
Michiel N Kerstens1, Anneke C Muller Kobold2, Ido P Kema2,
Bruce H R Wolffenbuttel1 & André P van Beek1
1Department of Endocrinology, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands;2Department of
Laboratory Medicine, University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Background
Patients with secondary adrenal insufficiency show increased risk of cardiovas-
cular disease. Higher doses of glucocorticoid replacement are related to an
unfavourable metabolic profile. In the absence of randomized controlled trials
assessing the effect of hydrocortisone dose on haemodynamics and blood pressure
regulation,  we  determined  effects  of  a  higher  vs  a  lower  glucocorticoid
replacement dose on blood pressure, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
(RAAS) and sympathetic activity.
Materials and methods
Forty-seven patients treated for secondary adrenal insufficiency participated in
this  randomized  double  blind  cross-over  study
(Clinicaltrials.gov  identifier:
NCT01546922). Patients were randomized to receive 0.2-0.3 mg hydrocortisone/kg
body weight followed by 0.4-0.6 mg hydrocortisone/kg body weight or vice
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
versa, both for 10 weeks. Each treatment period was followed by a study visit
including measurement of blood pressure and collection of fasting blood samples.
Results
The higher dose of hydrocortisone resulted in a mean (S.D.) increase in body
weight of 0.5 (1.7) kg (PZ0.045), an increase in systolic blood pressure of 5 (12)
mmHg  (PZ0.011)  and  a  borderline  significant  increase  in  diastolic  blood
pressure of 2 (9) mmHg (PZ0.050). A median [interquartile] plasma potassium
decrease was observed of K0.1 [K0.3; 0.1] mmol/l (PZ0.048). Furthermore, the
higher dose of hydrocortisone led to a decrease in plasma renin concentrations of
K1.4 [K4.7; 1.2] pg/ml (PZ0.015), a decrease in aldosterone levels of K27
[K101; 9] pmol/l (PZ0.020) and a decrease in aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR)
of K2.6 [K5.6; 1.4] pmol/ng (PZ0.047). In addition, a decrease of K0.104
[K0.242; 0.016] (PZ0.001) nmol/l in plasma normetanephrine concentration
was found on the higher dose of hydrocortisone, while metanephrines remained
unchanged.
Conclusion
The higher dose of hydrocortisone led to an increase in systolic and diastolic
blood pressure accompanied by a suppression of the RAAS and in sympathetic
activity. This suggests that hydrocortisone affects multiple pathways involved in
blood pressure regulation even at concentrations generally considered to be
physiological.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP152
GP153
Once-monthly injection of pasireotide LAR reduces urinary free
cortisol (UFC) levels in patients with Cushing’s disease: Results from a
randomised, multicentre, phase III trial
John Newell-Price1, Stephan Petersenn2, Beverly M K Biller3,
Michael Roughton4, Shoba Ravichandran5 & André Lacroix6
1The Medical School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK;2ENDOC
Center for Endocrine Tumors, Hamburg, Germany;3Neuroendocrine
Clinical Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA;4Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland;5Novartis Pharmaceuticals
Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey, USA;6Division of Endocrinology,
Centre hospitalier de l’Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Background
Twice-daily formulation of pasireotide, a pituitary-directed therapy, is approved
for treatment of Cushing’s disease. Here we present data from a phase III study
designed to evaluate the more convenient once-monthly long-acting release
(LAR) formulation of pasireotide (approved for acromegaly) in patients with
Cushing’s disease.
Methods
Patients with persistent, recurrent, or de novo Cushing’s disease (not candidates
for surgery) and baseline mean UFC (mUFC) R1.5-%5!ULN (mean of three
24-h UFC collections) were randomised (double-blind) to pasireotide LAR 10 mg
or 30 mg; at month 4, dose could be increased to 30 mg or 40 mg, respectively, if
mUFCO1.5!ULN. Patients (NZ150; baseline median mUFC 2.4!ULN) were
stratified for analysis by screening mUFC: stratum 1 (mUFC R1.5-!2!ULN)
and stratum 2 (mUFC 2-5!ULN). The primary efficacy endpoint was the
proportion of patients with mUFC%ULN at month 7, regardless of dose titration.
Results
The primary efficacy response rate was 41.9% (95%CI, 30.5-53.9%) and 40.8%
(95%CI,
29.7-52.7%)  in
10 mg  (nZ74)  and  30 mg  (nZ76)  dose  groups,
respectively. In stratum 1 (milder disease), 52% (13/25) patients in both 10 mg
and 30 mg groups had mUFC%ULN. In stratum 2, 36.7% (18/49) and 35.3%
(18/51) patients in 10 mg and 30 mg groups, respectively, had mUFC%ULN.
Median percentage decrease in mUFC from baseline to month 7 was 48% in both
dose groups. Two deaths reported in the 30 mg group (cardiorespiratory failure
and pulmonary artery thrombosis) were not considered drug-related. The safety
profile of pasireotide LAR was consistent with that of twice-daily pasireotide.
Fifty (68%) and 61 (80%) patients experienced hyperglycaemia-related adverse
events in the 10 mg and 30 mg groups, respectively; of these 2 (2.7%) and 3
(3.9%) patients discontinued.
Conclusions
Results from this phase III study in patients with Cushing’s disease show that
pasireotide LAR treatment effectively lowers UFC levels with a tolerability
profile similar to the twice-daily subcutaneous formulation, and provides a
convenient monthly administration schedule.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP153
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP154
Outcome predictors in profound hyponatremia - a prospective
12-month-follow-up study
Nica Frech1, Bettina Winzeler1,4, Nicole Nigro1,4, Isabelle Suter-Widmer1,4,
Philipp Schutz2,4, Birsen Arici1,4, Martina Bally2,4, Claudine Blum2,4,
Christian Nickel3,4, Roland Bingisser3,4, Andreas Bock4,5,
Andreas Huber4,6, Beat Muller2,4 & Mirjam Christ-Crain1,4
1University Hospital Basel, Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism,
Basel, Switzerland;2Medical University Clinic, Divisions of Endo-
crinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, Kantonsspital Aarau, Aarau,
Switzerland;3University Hospital Basel, Emergency Medicine, Basel,
Switzerland;4Department of Clinical Research, University Hospital Basel,
Basel, Switzerland;5Nephrology, Dialysis & Transplantation, Kantonsspital
Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland;6Institut of Laboratory Medicine, Kantonsspital
Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland.
Introduction
Hyponatremia is the most common electrolyte abnormality in clinical practice
and given its impact on mortality and morbidity a relevant medical condition.
Nevertheless little is known about factors influencing long-term outcome.
Methods
This is a prospective observational 12 months follow-up study of patients with
profound hyponatremia (%125 mmol/l) admitted to the medical emergency
department of two tertiary care centers in Switzerland between 2011 and 2013.
We analysed the association of different clinical and laboratory parameters with
following  three  outcomes:
1-year-mortality,  rehospitalisation  and  recurrent
profound hyponatremia.
Results
Median [IQR] initial serum sodium (s-sodium) level of the 281 patients included
(median age 72 years [61-80]) was 120 mmol/l [116-123]. During the study-
period 58 (20.6%) patients died. The majority (56.2%) was hospitalized at least
once again, 28.5% even repeatedly. Recurrent hyponatremia was observed in
42.7%, being profound again in 16%. Beside relevant comorbidities (assessed by
the  Charlson  Comorbidity  Index)  the  following  two  parameters  revealed
significant association with the main outcome mortality - also after multivariate
adjustment: ‘initial s-sodium level’ (Odds Ratio [OR] 1.14, 95% Confidence
Interval [CI] 1.01-1.29, PZ0.036) and ‘corrected s-sodium R135 mmol/l at
discharge’ (OR 0.47, 95% CI 0.23-0.94, PZ0.034).
Severity of hyponatremia showed an inverse correlation with mortality. Thus,
we compared patients with s-sodium levels %120 mmol/l to those with levels
O120 mmol/l; the latter had a significant higher mortality rate than patients with
lower  s-sodium  levels
(27.8%  vs
14.8%,  PZ0.0078).  Also  etiology  of
hyponatremia differed: patients with s-sodium level %120 mmol/l were more
likely to have drug induced hyponatremia (49% vs 29.4%, PZ0.0008), whereas
hypervolemic hyponatremia was more common in patients with initial s-sodium
level above 120 mmol/l (15.9% vs 7.7%, PZ0.033).
Conclusion
Hyponatremia  goes  along  with  a  high
1-year-mortality,  recurrence  and
rehospitalisation  rate.  The  inverse  correlation  of  hyponatremia-severity  and
mortality emphasizes the importance of the underlying disease, which rather
determines outcome than hyponatremia itself.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP154
GP155
Plasma apelin concentrations in patients with polyuria-polydipsia
syndrome
Sandrine Urwyler1, Katharina Timper2, Wiebke Fenske3, Nadia de Mota4,
Anne Blanchard5, Felix Kuhn6, Nica Frech1, Birsen Arici7,
Jonas Ruthishauser8, Peter Kopp9, Christoph Stettler6, Beat Muller10,
Mira Katan11, Catherine Llorens-Cortes4 & Mirjam Christ-Crain1
1Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Clinical
Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland;2Max-Planck-
Institute for Metabolism Research, Cologne, Germany;3Integrated Research
and Treatment Center for Adiposity Diseases, Leipzig University Medical
Center, Medical Research Center Building, Leipzig, Germany;4Laboratory
of Central Neuropeptides in the Regulation of Body Fluid Homeostasis and
Cardiovascular Functions, CIRB, College de France, INSERM U1050,
Paris, France;5Assistance publique des hôpitaux de Paris, European
Georges Pompidou Hospital, Clinical Investigation Center, Paris, France;
6Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Clinical Nutrition, University
Hospital Bern - Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland;7Department of Internal
Medicine, Spital Rheinfelden, Rheinfelden, Switzerland;8University Clinic
of Internal Medicine, Kantonsspital Baselland, Bruderholz, Bruderholz,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Switzerland;9Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular
Medicine and Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University,
Chicago, Illinois, USA;10Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology and
Metabolism, Medical University Clinic, Kantonsspital Aarau, Aarau,
Switzerland;11Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
Background
Apelin and arginine-vasopressin (AVP) are antagonists in the regulation of body
fluid and osmotic homeostasis. So far there exist no data about apelin levels in
patients with polyuria-polydipsia syndrome (PPS).
Methods
Plasma apelin and copeptin concentrations were measured in 15 patients with
complete  central  diabetes  insipidus
(cDI),  in  seven  patients  with  complete
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (nDI) and 19 patients with primary polydipsia
(PP) and were compared to those in 113 healthy volunteers.
Results
Median plasma apelin levels were highest in patients with nDI (413 pmol/l (IQR
332; 504), PZ0.01) and lower in patients with PP (190 pmol/l (172; 215),
P!0.001)  or  cDI
(209 pmol/l
(174;
241),  PZ0.02)  compared  to  healthy
volunteers (254 pmol/l (225; 311)). Plasma apelin to copeptin ratio in patients
with PP (53 pmol/pmol (38; 92), PO0.9) was similar to healthy volunteers
(57 pmol/pmol (37; 102)). In contrast, apelin to copeptin ratio was higher in
patients with cDI (89 pmol/pmol (73; 135), PZ0.02) and lower in patients with
nDI (7 pmol/pmol (6; 10), P!0.001) compared to healthy volunteers.
Conclusion
In PP, normal plasma apelin to copeptin ratio attests a normal water homeostasis.
In contrast, in patients with cDI or nDI the increased or decreased apelin to
copeptin  ratio,  respectively,  reflects  a  disturbed  osmotic  and  body  fluid
homeostasis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP155
GP156
Natural history of a large cohort of pituitary incidentalomas in Italy
Alberto Stefano Tresoldi1,2, Alessandra Toini3, Eriselda Profka2,3,
Marco Locatelli4, Giovanni Battista Lasio5, Emanuela Morenghi6,
Anna Spada2,3, Giovanna Mantovani2,3 & Andrea Gerardo Lania1,7
1Endocrinology Unit, Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, Italy;
2Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy;3Endocrinology and Diabetology Unit, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy;
4Neurosurgery Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Milan, Italy;
5Neurosurgery Unit, Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, Italy;
6Biometry Unit, Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Milan, Italy;
7Department of Biotechnologies and Translational Medicine, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.
In this observational, retrospective, multicenter study, we analyzed data from 300
patients with pituitary incidentaloma followed in two Italian Hospital Center. We
observed a predominance of female patients (65%), with an a mean age at
diagnosis of 49 years (higher in men than women, 57 vs 45 years old). The main
reason to perform imaging were neurological symptoms not related to the
presence of adenomas (56%). Most cases were microadenomas (56%), and
macroadenomas were more frequent in males than females (75 vs 28%).
The first hormonal evaluation showed at least one pituitary deficiency in 21% of
patients (35% of macroadenomas vs 10% of microadenomas). Hormonal follow
up (median 3 years, range 0-27) showed a worsening in pituitary function in 7%
of patients (7% of microadenomas vs 9% of macroadenomas). Radiological
follow up (median 3 years, range 0-32) showed an increase of dimension in 27
patients (more frequent in macroadenomas, 33 vs 10%) and a reduction in 16% of
cases. However, radiological and biochemical modification were concordant only
in the 69% of patients; in six patients we witnessed a deterioration of pituitary
function in presence of an adenoma stable or in reduction. Overall, 66 patients
underwent surgery; in 58 cases surgical indication was formulated at diagnosis,
while in eight patients during follow up due to growth of the lesion.
In our population, accordingly with the data available in literature, macro-
adenomas are more frequently found in males, and more prone to volumetric
growth over time. Hormonal function is altered in about 1/5 of patients at
diagnosis, with further deficit onset during the follow up; these changes are not
always  in  agreement  with  radiological  changes,  remarking  that,  besides
radiological assessement, a periodical biochemical follow up is also needed in
these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP156
GP157
Prevalence of acromegaly in patients referred for sleep apnea syndrome
(SAS): results of ACROSAS Study
J L Pépin1, L M Galerneau1, A L Borel2, O Chabre2, M Sapene3, B Stach4,
J Girey-Rannaud5, R Tamisier1 & Ph Caron6
1Laboratoire d’EFCR et Laboratoire du Sommeil, Grenoble, France;
2Service d’Endocrinologie, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France;3Centre de
Pneumologie, Bordeaux, France;4Clinique Tessier, Valenciennes, France;
5Pneumologie, Grenoble, France;6Service d’Endocrinologie, CHU Larrey,
Toulouse, France.
Introduction
Acromegaly is a rare disease (estimated prevalence 40-125 cases per million)
resulting from GH/IGF1 hypersecretion, mostly by pituitary adenomas. SAS has a
prevalence of up to 80% in acromegalic patients. The high frequency of acromegaly-
related comorbidities and delayed diagnosis although effective treatments exist,
make it necessary a screening of acromegaly in at risk populations.
Aim
In a national multicenter study, to determine the prevalence of acromegaly in
patients referred for SAS.
Patients and methods
Patients referred at Grenoble university hospital and in ten private practice centers
for SAS suspicion were recruited consecutively from November 2013 to October
2014. Clinical data and co-morbidities were collected via an electronic case report
form  of  French  Sleep  Observatory
(OSFP).  Patients  had  polysomnography/
respiratory polygraphy and systematic serum IGF-1 determination. When serum
IGF1 levels were elevated for age and sex, IGF1 level and GH during OGTT were
performed and patients with GH/IGF1 hypersecretion had MRI of the pituitary and
were examined by an endocrinologist for definite diagnosis of acromegaly.
Results
873 patients with suspected SAS were included: 817 patients had IGF1 and 755 had
polysomnography or respiratory polygraphy. SAS (Apnea/Hypopnea Index O15/h)
was present in 567 patients and absent (AHI !15/h) in 188 patients. SAS patients
were men (68%), older (54G12 vs 48G13 years, P!0.0001), had higher BMI
(31.4G6.6 vs 29.0G6.0 kg/m2, P!0.0001) and lower IGF1 levels (142G63 vs
162G61 ng/ml, P!0.0001). 5 SAS patients had a 10% increase of IGF1 above the
upper limit of normal and two SAS patients had acromegaly due to GH-secreting
pituitary macroadenoma.
Conclusion
The prevalence of acromegaly is greater than 35/10 000 in our patients with SAS
and higher than in the general population. Further studies are needed to evaluate the
cost-effectiveness of IGF1 screening in patients with SAS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP157
GP158
Differentiated pharmacokinetics of levoketoconazole (COR-003), the
single 2S,4R-enantiomer of ketoconazole, a new investigational drug for
the treatment of Cushing’s syndrome
Ruth Thieroff-Ekerdt1 & Diane Mould2
1Strongbridge Biopharma, Trevose, Pennsylvania, USA;2President
Projections Research, Inc., Phoenixville, Pennsylvania, USA.
Ketoconazole is a 50/50 racemic mixture of two enantiomers (2S,4R and 2R,4S)
used off label in the US for the treatment of endogenous Cushing’s syndrome by
virtue of adrenal cortisol synthesis inhibition.
COR-003 (levoketoconazole) is the more potent single (2S,4R) enantiomer of
ketoconazole (KTZ) to inhibit adrenal cortisol synthesis and is currently being
investigated in a multinational Phase 3 study for the treatment of endogenous
Cushing’s syndrome.
In a three period cross-over study in 24 healthy subjects dosed with ketoconazole
at an oral dose of 400 mg QD, plasma concentrations of the two enantiomers were
measured on Day 5 after 4 day QD oral dosing with 400mg ketoconazole and a
single 80-mg dose of atorvastatin on Day 5. Maximal plasma concentrations of
the 2S, 4R enantiomer were about three-fold higher (6.1 mg/ml, coefficient of
variation 40.7%) than those of the 2R, 4S enantiomer. This pattern was also
observed in a Phase 2a study in 37 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus dosed for
14 days with 400 mg QD oral ketoconazole. PK data of KTZ, COR-003 and
2R, 4S were modeled using a population approach with the software package
NONMEM version 7.2. PK modeling of KTZ, COR-003 and 2R, 4S suggested
dose-proportional exposure for all analytes and linear PK, and revealed a greater
clearance of 2R, 4S and a monophasic plasma-time curve of COR-003 in contrast
to KTZ with two peaks.
Study treatments were safe and well tolerated. Headache, nausea, diarrhea, and
back pain were the most frequently reported AEs.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Taken  together,  PK  data  show  that  COR-003
reaches  higher  plasma
concentrations with reduced clearance compared to 2R,4S, potentially indicating
reduced hepatic metabolism. Mechanistic nonclinical studies are being conducted
to further investigate the differentiated PK profile of COR-003 and implications
for hepatotoxicity and efficacy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP158
GP159
The partner perspective of the impact of pituitary disease: results from
a focus group study
Cornelie Andela1, Jitske Tiemensma2, Adrian Kaptein1,
Margreet Scharloo1, Alberto Pereira1, Noëlle Kamminga1 &
Nienke Biermasz1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands;2University
of California, Merced, California, USA.
Background
Patients with pituitary disease demonstrated Quality of Life (QoL) impairment.
From other chronic diseases it is known that partners of patients also report
impairments in QoL. Furthermore, it is observed that well-being of patients is
associated with the well-being of their partners. To date, no data are available on
the well-being of partners of patients with pituitary disease. Therefore, the aim of
the present study was to explore well-being of partners of patients with pituitary
disease.
Methods
Four independent focus groups of 4-6 partners of patients with pituitary disease
(Cushing’s disease, non-functioning adenoma, acromegaly, prolactinoma) were
conducted. In two sessions, these groups of partners discussed the impact of the
pituitary disease on their own lives. Verbatim transcripts were analysed using a
grounded theory approach.
Results
Partners reported the negative influence of pituitary disease on their own lives,
including worries (related to the pituitary disease and the medical treatment),
coping difficulties (uncertainty about comforting or encouraging the ill partner,
problems with adaptation, high sense of responsibility, differences in coping
styles), relationship issues (changes the in relationship, communication with ill
partner, viewing the ill partner differently, issues regarding sexuality, issues with
the desire to have children), social issues (difficulties in communication about the
disease, lack of sympathy from environment, changes in social network, negative
impact on family, negative impact on work) and unmet needs regarding care
(insufficient information, no recognition for certain complaints, dissatisfaction
about aspects of medical care).
Conclusion
This first explorative focus group study in partners of patients with pituitary
disease elucidates the negative impact on their lives. This study emphasizes the
importance of not only paying attention to the psychosocial impact of patients
during medical consultation, but also to their partners. Furthermore, information
obtained in this study can be used for the development of a disease-specific
questionnaire for partners of patients with pituitary disease, in order to further
quantitatively assess their well-being, as well as for optimizing psychosocial care
not only for patients, but also for their partners.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP159
GP160
Anthropometric factors have significant influence on the outcome of the
GHRH-arginine test - establishment of normative data
Timo Deutschbein1, Martin Bidlingmaier2, Jochen Schopohl3, Christian
J Strasburger4 & Stephan Petersenn5
1Department of Internal Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes Unit,
University Hospital Wurzburg, University of Wurzburg, Wurzburg,
Germany;2Endocrine Research Laboratories, Medizinische Klinik und
Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universitat Munchen, Munich, Germany;
3Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universitat Munchen,
Munich, Germany;4Department of Medicine for Endocrinology, Diabetes
and Nutritional Medicine, Charite Universitatsmedizin, Campus Mitte,
Berlin, Germany;5ENDOC Center for Endocrine Tumors, Hamburg,
Germany.
Background
Adult GH deficiency (GHD) is diagnosed by provocative testing of GH secretion.
To improve diagnostic accuracy of GHRH plus arginine (GARG) testing, we
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
evaluated  the  influence  of  age,  BMI,  and  sex.  Furthermore,  we  aimed  to
established normative data for an automatic immunoassay specifically measuring
22kD human GH.
Methods
Eighty-seven  patients  with  hypothalamic-pituitary  disease  and
200  healthy
controls were enrolled. Controls were prospectively stratified for sex, age (18-30,
31-50, R51 years), and BMI (!25 {lean}, 25-29.9 {overweight}, R30 kg/m2
{obese}), with at least ten subjects in each subgroup. All participants received
GHRH (1 mg/kg i.v.) and L-arginine (30 g via 30 min infusion), with blood
sampling over 120 min. GH was measured by immunoassay (iSYS, IDS). ROC
analysis identified cutoffs with R95% specificity for GHD.
Results
In controls, multiple stepwise regression analysis revealed that BMI
(21%,
P!0.0001), sex (20%, P!0.0001), and age (5%, P!0.001), accounted for 46%
of GH peak level variability during GARG. Fifty-one patients with R2 additional
pituitary hormone deficiencies were considered GHD, the remaining 36 patients
were GH sufficient (GHS). Comparison of peak GH during GARG (GHD vs
GHSCcontrols)  revealed  an  overall  cutoff  of
3.9 ng/ml
(sensitivity
86%,
specificity 95%). BMI-adjusted cutoffs were established for males and females
(lean: 6.5 vs 9.7 ng/ml; overweight: 3.5 vs 8.5 ng/ml; obese: 2.2 vs 4.4 ng/ml).
Conclusion
BMI and sex account for most of the variability of peak GH levels during GARG.
Consequently, the diagnostic accuracy of the GARG test is significantly improved
by use of adjusted cutoffs. Especially gender differences during GH stimulation
testing may require more attention for the correct diagnosis of GHD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP160
GP161
Evaluation of MRI T2-signal intensities of GH-secreting pituitary
macroadenoma in treatment-naïve acromegalic patients receiving
primary treatment with lanreotide autogel (LAN-ATG) 120 mg
Philippe Caron1, Louis-David Riviere2, Aude Houchard3, Caroline Sert3 &
Fabrice Bonneville2
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, CHU Larrey,
Toulouse, France;2Department of Neuroradiology, CHU Purpan, Toulouse,
France;3Ipsen, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
Introduction
Pituitary  MRI  T2-signal  intensity  may  be  associated  with  the  response  to
somatostatin analogue therapy in acromegalic patients. Here, we explore how best
to evaluate MRI T2-signal intensity of GH-secreting pituitary macroadenoma
using  data  from  the  PRIMARYS  study
(NCT00690898;  EudraCT2007-
000155-34).
Methods
PRIMARYS assessed tumour volume reduction (TVR) on MRI in treatment-
naïve acromegalic patients with GH-secreting pituitary macroadenoma receiving
monthly LAN-ATG 120 mg primary therapy over 1 yr. In this additional post hoc
analysis, pituitary MRI T2-signals from 85 acromegalic patients were evaluated at
baseline and during treatment. T2-signal intensity was defined as hypo-/iso-/
hyper-intense based on comparison of adenoma/normal cerebral parenchyma,
according  to  a  qualitative  method
(visually  comparing  tissues);  and  two
quantitative methods using ratio of signal intensities of region-of-interests in
either tissues (adenoma vs grey matter only (first method) or vs grey matter and
white matters in adjacent lobes (second method)). Here, we present the results of
baseline MRI evaluations according three methods.
Results
A greater proportion of patients’ macroadenoma were categorized as hypointense
using the qualitative method (59%) than the quantitative methods (36 and 20%)
(Table 1). In addition, more of the patients showing full hormonal control or
tumoural response had hypointense macroadenoma using the qualitative than
using the quantitative methods (Table 1). There were no notable differences in
baseline demographics between groups. The exception was a trend towards
smaller TV in the hypointense group observed with all three methods; this was
Table 1 Hormonal control (GH %2.5 ng/ml and IGF-1!ULN) and tumour response (TVR R20%) at last visit according to baseline MRI T2-signal
intensity.
Qualitative method
Quantitative first method
Quantitative second method
Hormonal
Tumoural
Hormonal
Tumoural
Hormonal
Tumoural
T2-signal
Overall
control
response
Overall
control
response
Overall
control
response
intensity
(nZ85)
(nZ30)
(nZ53)
(nZ85)
(nZ30)
(nZ53)
(nZ85)
(nZ30)
(nZ53)
Hypointense, n (%)
50
(59)
20
(67)
38
(72)
31
(36)
14
(47)
25
(47)
17
(20)
8
(27)
14
(26)
Isointense, n (%)
31
(36)
8
(27)
13
(25)
44
(52)
13
(43)
25
(47)
40
(47)
14
(47)
26
(49)
Hyperintense, n (%)
4
(5)
2
(7)
2
(4)
10
(12)
3
(10)
3
(6)
28
(33)
8
(27)
13
(25)
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
most evident, albeit still non-significant, on the qualitative method (mean (95%
CI) TV, mm3: hypointense, 2041 (1435-2647); isointense, 3280 (2120-4441);
hyperintense, 8533 (0-23843)).
Conclusion
A simple  qualitative  method  could  be  used  to  identify  MRI  T2-signal
hypointensity  in  treatment-naïve  acromegalic  patients  with  GH-secreting
pituitary  macroadenoma,  which  could  be  associated  with  later  favourable
responses to LAN-ATG primary therapy. Regression analyses are ongoing to
determine associations between T2-signal intensity and treatment response.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP161
GP162
Hippocampal and cerebellar atrophy in patients with Cushings disease
Till Burkhardt1, Daniel Ludecke2, Lothar Spies3, Wittmann Linus3,
Manfred Westphal1 & Jorg Flitsch1
1Neurosurgery, UKE, Hamburg, Germany;2Psychiatry, UKE, Hamburg,
Germany;3Jung Diagnostics, Hamburg, Germany.
Objective
Cushing’s disease (CD) may cause atrophy of different regions of the human
brain, mostly affecting the hippocampus and the cerebellum. This study evaluates
the use of 3-T MRI of newly diagnosed patients with CD to detect atrophic
degeneration with voxel-based volumetry.
Methods
Subjects with newly diagnosed, untreated CD were included and underwent 3-T
MRI. Images were analyzed using a voxelwise statistical test to detect reduction
of brain parenchyma. In addition, an atlas-based volumetric study for regions
likely to be affected by CD was performed.
Results
Nineteen patients with a mean disease duration of 24 months were included.
Tumor markers included adre-nocorticotropic hormone (median 17.5 pmol/l),
cortisol
(949.4 nmol/l), and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (5.4 mmol/l). The
following values are expressed as the meanGS.D. The voxelwise statistical test
revealed clusters of significantly reduced gray matter in the hippocampus and
cerebellum, with volumes of 2.90G0.26 ml (right hippocampus), 2.89G0.28 ml
(left hippocampus), 41.95G4.67 ml (right cerebellar hemisphere), and 42.11G
4.59 ml (left cerebellar hemisphere). Healthy control volunteers showed volumes
of
3.22G0.25 ml  for  the  right  hippocampus,
3.23G0.25 ml  for  the  left
hippocampus, 50.87G4.23 ml for the right cerebellar hemisphere, and 50.42G
3.97 ml for the left cerebellar hemisphere.
Conclusion
Patients with untreated CD show significant reduction of gray matter in the
cerebellum and hippocampus. These changes can be analyzed and objectified with
the quantitative voxel-based method described in this study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP162
GP163
Medical treatment of macroprolactinomas Escalation and
de-escalation of dopamine agonist dose
Anne-Cécile Paepegaey, Sylvie Salenave, Peter Kamenicky, Jacques Young
& Philippe Chanson
Endocrinology and Reproductive Diseases, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux
de Paris, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Sud (site Bicêtre), Le Kremlin
Bicetre, France.
Background
Cabergoline (CAB) is the most effective dopamine agonist (DA) used for the
treatment of macroprolactinoma. Few data on the dose of CAB necessary for
achieving and maintaining normal prolactin (PRL) levels are available. We aimed
to study these parameters in a large series of patients with macroprolactinomas
Methods
We retrospectively analysed the clinical, biochemical and imaging features at
diagnosis and the treatment response to CAB (dose necessary for normalizing and
thereafter for maintaining normal PRL levels on long term) in 260 patients (125F)
with  macroprolactinomas  followed  at  the  Service  d0 Endocrinologie  et  des
Maladies de la Reproduction in Hôpital Bicetre Hospital, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France.
Results
At diagnosis, the median [min; max] age, PRL level and maximal tumor diameter
was 32.7 [10.6; 83.1] years,
680 [6; 38000] ng/ml and 20 [10; 110] mm,
respectively. PRL levels were normalized in 68.4% of patients under CAB
treatment. Weekly mean (SD) CAB dose necessary for normalizing and thereafter
for  maintaining  normal  PRL  levels  were
1.30
(1.02)  and
0.74
(0.62)  mg
(P%1.10K4), respectively. CAB dose de-escalation was tried in 84 (53.5%) of the
153 patients in whom CAB succeeded to normalize PRL levels. This dose
de-escalation  was  successful  in
77  out  of
84  patients
(91.7%).  The  main
differences between patients in which dose de-escalation was tried and the others
are the duration of CAB treatment (P%1.10K4), the duration between the
introduction of CAB and the time of PRL normalization (PZ0.05) and the tumor
volume at time of PRL normalization (PZ0.02).
Conclusion
The dose of CAB necessary for maintaining normal PRL level on long term is lower
than the dose necessary for normalizing PRL levels. Dose de-escalation after
normalization of PRL levels is possible and potentially useful when considering the
potential side effects of the drug which depends on its cumulative dose.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP163
GP164
Ipilimumab-induced hypophysitis in melanoma patients: a single centre
experience
Mohit Kumar1, Samantha Bowyer1, Paul Lorigan1,2, Claire Higham1 &
Peter Trainer1
1Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK;2University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
Ipilimumab, a monoclonal antibody against CTLA-4, is licenced for the treatment
of metastatic melanoma (dose of 3 mg/kg for four cycles intravenously). It can
cause  immune-related  adverse  reactions
(IRAEs)  in  multiple  organs,  with
hypophysitis the most common endocrine IRAE. We carried out a retrospective
analysis of 171 ipilimumab-treated patients in one centre for endocrinopathies.
Results
Nine cases (six female, mean age 64 years, range 42-76) of ipilimumab-induced
hypopituitarism were identified (incidence 5.3%). Mean time to hypophysitis was
64 days (17-188 days, mean 3.4 cycles) post-commencement of ipilimumab. All
patients were identified at clinic visits or presented acutely; fatigue, headache and
blurred vision were the most common symptoms. At diagnosis, three patients
were hyponatraemic; hormone deficiencies were: eight cortisol (no recovery),
eight TSH (four recovered), seven gonadotrophin (three recovered), no DI. Seven
patients had IGF-1 measured (two high, two low). Five patients had low TSH
(0.03-0.54;NR0.55-4.78 mU/l)  with  low  normal  fT4
(12.7-15.5;  NR10-
22 pmol/l) the month before diagnosis. Five patients’ MRI scans demonstrated
enlarged pituitary; follow-up scans showed normal pituitary in three, one reduced
pituitary size and one empty sella. Four patients had additional IRAEs (three
colitis,  one  dermatitis,  one  hepatitis).  Four  patients  received  high  dose
glucocorticoids (2-methylprednisolone, 2-dexamethasone), with no difference
in hormone recovery, however one developed diabetes mellitus and another
steroid psychosis. No other endocrinopathy was diagnosed.
Discussion
In our series, the incidence of ipilimumab-hypophysitis was approximately 5%.
Cases occurred from the first cycle to several months after treatment completion.
A normal pituitary on MR does not exclude hypopituitarism. The low TSH
documented a month prior to clinical presentation may be a valuable marker of
early hypophysitis and represent an opportunity for earlier diagnosis. Treatment
with  high  dose  glucocorticoids
(as  recommended  by  manufacturers)  is  of
uncertain value and can lead to side effects. Hypopituitarism is rarely reversible
and not a reason to discontinue ipilimumab.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP164
GP165
Remission, recurrence and control rates in patients with ACTH-
dependent Cushing’s syndrome- a monocentric, retrospective analysis
Julia Fazel, Christina Berr, Felix Beuschlein, Jochen Schopohl,
Martin Bidlingmaier & Martin Reincke
Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Schwerpunkt Endokrinologie/
Diabetologie, Klinikum der Universitat Munchen, Ziemssenstrasse 1,
Munich, Germany.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Transsphenoidal surgery is the gold standard in Cushing’s disease and recurrence
is a major risk. We wondered which impact remission and recurrence might have
on control rates of hypercortisolism and conducted a systematic analysis of our
cohort of patients with Cushing’s syndrome after undergoing surgical therapy.
Methods
We analysed the course of the disease in 74 patients with ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s syndrome (63 Cushing’s disease (CD); 11 ectopic Cushing’s syndrome
(ECS)). All patients underwent surgery as first line therapy and in cases where
relapse  occurred,  each  received  further  therapy.  The  outcomes  of  interest
were biochemical remission/control, clinical remission and recurrence, with
evaluations conducted annually from the time of first treatment (follow-up time:
1-38 years).
Clinical remission was defined by the absence of Cushing stigmata. Biochemical
remission/control was defined as normal urinary free cortisol levels, normal
salivary  cortisol  levels  at  midnight  and/or  cortisol
!1.8 mg/dl  after
1 mg
overnight dexamethasone suppression test. Data analysis was conducted using the
Kaplan-Meier method.
Results
In patients with CD the biochemical control rates at 1, 2 and 3 years were 77.2,
81.8, and 77.2%. In contrast, patients with ECS showed considerably higher
remission rates with 88.8% at 1 year and 100% at 2 and 3 years. The cumulative
recurrence free remission rate in CD was 71.4% at 1 and 2, and 54.2% at 5 years.
In patients having second transsphenoidal surgery the remission rate was poor
with 50% at 1 and 2 years, and 40% at 5 years.
Conclusions
The outcome of patients in remission 1 year after initial surgery is associated with
higher remission rates in the long term, while the absence of remission after 1
year, or the occurrence of early relapse are related to a noticeably poorer outcome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP165
GP166
Auditory changes in acromegaly
Suzan Tabur1, Hakan Korkmaz2, Elif Baysal3, Esra Hatipoglu4,
Ismail Aytac5 & Ersin Akarsu1
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Gaziantep University, Gaziantep, Turkey;
2Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Edirne Government Hospital, Edirne, Turkey;3Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, Inonu University, Malatya, Turkey;4Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, Liv
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;5Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Mardin
Midyat Government Hospital, Mardin, Turkey.
Introduction
Certain sensory system functions are affected somehow in acromegaly, however
auditory complications have not been identified in detail yet. It is possible that
widespread changes in acromegaly may also affect auditory system. We aimed to
determine the changes involving auditory system in cases with acromegaly.
Methods/design
Otological examination of 41 cases with acromegaly (active nZ22, inactive
nZ19) were compared with that of age and gender-matched 42 healthy subjects
(HS). All cases in acromegaly group (AG) underwent examination with pure tone
audiometry
(PTA),  speech  audiometry  for  speech  discrimination
(SD),
tympanometry,  stapedius  reflex
(SR)  evaluation  and  otoacoustic  emission
(OAE) tests whereas the control group had only otological examination and
PTA. Additionally, previously performed paranasal sinus computed tomography
of all cases with acromegaly and control subjects were obtained to measure the
length of Internal Acoustic Canal (IAC).
Results
In AG and HS PTA values were 20 (15-30) and 13 (12-15) dB in right ears
(P!0.001) and, were 20 (13-28) and13 (12-15) dB in left ears (P!0.001).
SD scores in AG and HS were 92 (84-96)% and 96 (92-96)% in right and, 92
(84-96)% and 96 (92-96)% in left (PZ0.002). IAC width in AG was narrower
compared to that in CG (In AG 4.5 (4.1-5.3) mm and in CG 4.9 (4.4-6.2),
PZ0.04 for right ears. In AG 4.5 (4.2-5.4) mm and in CG 5.2 (5-7) mm PZ0.009
for left ears). PTA values of AG in left ears had positive correlation with GH and
IGF1 levels (rZ0.4, PZ0.02 and rZ0.3, PZ0.03). Thirteen (32%) cases in AG
had hearing loss, 7 (54%) was sensorineural type and 6 (46%) was conductive
type hearing loss.
Conclusion
Acromegaly may cause certain changes in auditory system. These changes may
be multifactorial causing both conductive and sensorioneural defects.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP166
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP167
Sleep apnea in patients with acromegaly - prevalence, diagnosis and
risk factors
Konstantina Vouzouneraki1, Karl Franklin1, Maria Forsgren2, Maria Wärn3,
Jenny Tiberg4, Helena Wik4, Christina Dahlgren5, Caroline Alkebro6,
Ann-Sofie Nilsson7, Anna-Karin 
˚kerman6, Pia Burman7,
Charlotte Høybye3, Oskar Ragnarsson4, Jeanette Wahlberg, Britt
Edén Engstrom2 & Per Dahlqvist1
1Umeå University Hospital, Umea˚, Sweden;2Uppsala University Hospital,
Uppsala, Sweden;3Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden;
4Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden;5Linkoping
University Hospital, Linkoping, Sweden;6Orebro University Hospital,
Orebro, Sweden;7Ska˚ne University Hospital, Malmo-Lund, Sweden.
Introduction
Patients with acromegaly have an increased mortality, mainly due to cardiovascular
and respiratory diseases. Sleep apnea is related to hypertension, stroke and
cardiovascular diseases and is reported to occur in 11-30% of acromegaly patients,
according to retrospective studies based on diagnostic ICD-codes. However, in
smaller prospective studies sleep apnea is found in about 70% of patients with active
acromegaly and 40% after biochemical control. This difference raises the suspicion
that sleep apnea may be an underdiagnosed complication of acromegaly.
Methods
This was a prospective cross-sectional multicenter study of 260 patients (128
women) with acromegaly registered in the Swedish Pituitary Registry. At a single
outpatient visit (2013-2014), previous diagnosis and treatment for sleep apnea and
cardiovascular diseases were assessed, data on smoking and anthropometry were
collected, IGF1 concentrations were measured and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale
was completed. Patients with clinical suspicion of undiagnosed sleep apnea were
referred for sleep studies.
Results
75/260 (29%) patients were previously diagnosed with sleep apnea. In 57% of these
sleep apnea was diagnosed before acromegaly was diagnosed. After screening
(Epworth Sleepiness Scale) and sleep studies, sleep apnea was found in another 20
(8%) patients, resulting in a total prevalence of 37%. The risk for sleep apnea (after
adjustment for age and gender) was increased with higher BMI, IGF-1 and index
finger circumference. Sleep apnea was not significantly associated with stroke/TIA,
diabetes or hypertension.
Conclusion
Sleep apnea is a frequent complication in acromegaly related to overweight and
IGF-1. Awareness of this complication is good in Sweden. However, a simple
screening  questionnaire  and  subsequent  sleep  study  revealed  previously
undiagnosed sleep apnea in 8% of the patients. Screening for sleep apnea is
recommended in acromegaly patients especially those with high BMI and IGF-1.
In addition, collaboration between sleep clinics and endocrinology departments
may enhance earlier diagnosis of acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP167
GP168
Dynamics of adrenocorticotropin after stimulation with metyrapone
(DYNAMO)
Sebastian Noe1, Alexander von Werder1, Roman Iakoubov1, Bruno Neu1,
Heike Schneider2, Markus Thaler2 & Peter Luppa2
1Klinikum rechts der Isar, II, Medizinische Klinik, Munich, Germany;
2Klinikum rechts der Isar, Institut fur klinische Chemie und Pathobio-
chemie, Munich, Germany.
Purpose
To  investigate  the  kinetics  of  adrenocorticotropin
(ACTH)  following  oral
metyrapone administration and describe differences between ACTH-deficient
and non ACTH-deficient subjects.
Methods
Patients from a tertiary endocrine center at a University Hospital in Munich,
Germany, were tested. Metyrapone (Metopirone, HRA Pharma, France) was
administered with a dosage of 40 mg/kg bodyweight at 0800 h. Consecutive
levels of ACTH were determined at 0, 60, 120, 180, and 240 min. Patients were
categorized according to their need of glucocorticoid substitution. The study was
approved by the local Ethics Committee with a limitation to 25 patients.
Results
Of 25 patients, 15 (60%) were female. Mean age was 52.3 years (range 21-79).
ACTH (mean (G S.D.)) was 12.3 (G8.7) pg/ml before stimulation and 104.7
(G114.9), 84.9 (G65.4), 82.2 (G65.1), and 102.7 (G83.5) pg/ml at 60, 120, 180,
and 240 min, respectively. Cortisol (mean (GS.D.)) was 10.6 (G5.1) mg/dl before
stimulation and 2.6 (G2.1), 1.7 (G0.9), 1.6 (G0.9), and 1.6 (G0.9) mg/dl at 60,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
120, 180, and 240 min, respectively. There was an 8.51-fold and a 7.65-fold rise
in ACTH compared to the basal level (tZ0) at 60 and 120 min, respectively.
Analyzing groups as categorized by the course of clinical follow up (G13.6
months;  range
0-39  months),  there  were  significant  differences  in  ACTH
concentrations at 60 min (166.2 vs 21.3 pg/ml; P!0.001) and at 120 min (121.8
vs 27.7 pg/ml; P!0.001). Using ROC analysis of those patients who remained
free of glucocorticoid substitution with ACTH at 60 min, and ACTH at 120 min,
AUCs of 0.83 (PZ0.007) and 0.92 (PZ0.001) were achieved, respectively.
Conclusion
In contrast to previous reports, we found a significant rise in ACTH concentration
as soon as one hour after oral metyrapone administration. Early ACTH values
seem to estimate the pituitary corticotrophic function.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP168
Receptors & Signalling
GP169
Chemotherapy resistance and metastasis-promoting effects of thyroid
hormone in hepatocarcinoma cells are mediated by suppression of
FoxO1 and Bim pathway
Hsiang-Cheng Chi & Kwang-Huei Lin
Chang-Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide, and systemic chemotherapy is the major treatment strategy for late-
stage HCC patients. Poor prognosis following chemotherapy is the general
outcome owing to recurrent resistance. Recent studies have suggested that in
addition  to  cytotoxic  effects  on  tumor  cells,  chemotherapy  can  induce  an
alternative cascade that supports tumor growth and metastasis. In the present
investigation, we showed that thyroid hormone (TH), a potent hormone mediating
cellular differentiation and metabolism, acts as an anti-apoptosis factor upon
challenge of thyroid hormone receptor (TR)-expressing HCC cells with cancer
therapy drugs, including cisplatin, doxorubicin and tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). TH/TR signaling promoted chemotherapy
resistance through negatively regulating the pro-apoptotic protein, Bim, resulting
in doxorubicin-induced metastasis of chemotherapy-resistant HCC cells. Ectopic
expression of Bim in hepatoma cells challenged with chemotherapeutic drugs
abolished TH/TR-triggered apoptosis resistance and metastasis. Furthermore,
Bim expression was directly transactivated by Forkhead box protein O1 (FoxO1),
which was negatively regulated by TH/TR. TH/TR suppressed FoxO1 activity
through both transcriptional downregulation and nuclear exclusion of FoxO1
triggered by Akt-mediated phosphorylation. Ectopic expression of the constitu-
tively active FoxO1 mutant, FoxO1-AAA, but not FoxO1-wt, diminished the
suppressive effect of TH/TR on Bim. Our findings collectively suggest that
expression of Bim is mediated by FoxO1 and indirectly downregulated by TH/TR,
leading to chemotherapy resistance and doxorubicin-promoted metastasis of
hepatoma cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP169
GP170
Altered exression of circadian clock genes in polyglandular
autoimmune syndrome type III
Anna Angelousi, Narjes Nasiri-Ansari, Eliana Spilioti, Vasiliki Kalotychou,
George Chrousos, Gregory Kaltsas & Eva Kassi
National Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, Athens,
Greece.
Introduction
CLOCK system is a highly conserved, ubiquitous molecular ‘clock’ which creates
internal circadian rhythmicity under the influence of light/dark information.
CLOCK system is regulated by the coordinated activation/inactivation of several
transcription factors, including the CLOCK, the BMAL1 and other essential
regulators, such as the Pers, Crys and RORs. The present study aimed to evaluate
the  circadian  rhythm  of  clock-related  genes  expressed  in  patients  with
polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type III (PASIII).
Methods
Sixteen patients diagnosed with PASIII and nine healthy controls were enrolled.
Patients and controls were age and gender-matched. All patients had normal
adrenal function. We analysed mRNA and protein expression by real-time PCR
and western blot analysis of CLOCK-related and glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
genes isolated from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from blood
samples drawn at 0800 and 2000 h. At the same time, plasma cortisol and ACTH
were also measured by chemiluminescence. Statistical analysis were performed
with spss,vs 20.
Results
Our data showed a significant increase in the evening to morning CLOCK, GR,
BMAL1, ROR and PER3 mRNA expression ratio (Rpm/am) in patients compared to
controls (PZ0.006, PZ0.04, PZ0.004, PZ0.02 and PZ0.004 respectively). In
patients the amplitude of cortisol circadian variation (DF0800-2000h) demonstrated
a significant positive correlation with the Rpm/am of CLOCK, BMAL1 and Per 3
expression (PZ0.033, PZ0.02 and PZ0.03 respectively) whereas in controls
DF800-2000h  presented a significant negative correlation with the Rpm/am  of
CLOCK and BMAL1 (PZ0.07 and PZ0.007). No significant correlation was
found between DF800-2000h and GR or ROR expression, neither in patients nor in
controls.
Conclusions
These findings suggest that there is an abberant expression of clock-related genes
in patients with PASIII compared to healthy controls. Daily pattern expression of
five circadian clock genes was disrupted in patients with PAS III indicating a
possible association with the pathogenesis of the disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP170
GP171
Zebrafish as a new model to study in vivo the functional consequences of
human THRA variants
Federica Marelli1, Silvia Carra2, Giuditta Rurale2, Franco Cotelli2 &
Luca Persani1,2
1Irccs Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy;2Universita’ Degli Studi Di
Milano, Milan, Italy.
Introduction
Since 2012, different heterozygous mutations in the THRA gene have been
described in patients with resistance to thyroid hormone alpha (RTHa). The
associating symptoms are reminiscent of untreated congenital hypothyroidism
(growth retardation, psycho-neuromotor disorders, delayed bone development
and bradycardia) but with raised T3/T4 ratio and normal TSH levels. All genetic
abnormalities  act  in  a  dominant  negative
(DN)  manner  against  functional
receptors due to reduced T3-binding or defective interaction with corepressors or
coactivators of the ligand-binding domain. Therefore, RTHa patients present
variable sensitivity to TH treatment. We previously described that zebrafish
embryos expressing a DN form of thraa recapitulate the key features of RTHa,
and that zebrafish and human receptors are functionally interchangeable.
Methods
In  this  work,  we  present  a  simplified  model  obtained  by  direct  mRNA
microinjection into zebrafish eggs of several human THRA variants (D211G,
A263V, A382PfsX7, E403X and F397fs406X). Using a series of molecular and
analytical  approaches
(WISH,  IHC,  ELISA)  we  studied  the  embryonic
development of cardiovascular, skeletal and nervous systems, which are directly
involved in the T3-dependent TRa action. Additionally, thyroid and pituitary
function, as well as the T3 and T4 contents were analysed.
Results
All THRA-injected embryos show defects in several tissues of variable entity:
altered  cardiovascular development, incomplete formation of  cartilages  and
bones, reduced number motorneurons that is reflected by defective zebrafish
locomotion. Furthermore, changes in deiodinases expression (high dio2, low
dio3a and dio3b levels) in presence of normal thyroid and pituitary markers, could
explain the high T3/T4 ratio observed in THRA-injecting embryos, as in RTHa
cases. Interestingly, the treatment with high T3 dose efficiently rescue most of
these defects only in D211G- and A263V-injected embryos, conserving part of
the T3-binding activity and transactivation properties.
Conclusion
Zebrafish represent a new ‘biotool’ to delineate the functional impact of new
THRA variants in vivo.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP171
GP172
Increased 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 mRNA level is
correlated with poor prognosis in endometrial cancer
Karlijn Cornel1, Camilla Krakstad2, Balazs Jori1, Marlies Bongers1,
Roy Kruitwagen1, Helga Salvesen2 & Andrea Romano1
1Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands;
2University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Endometrial cancer (EC) is estrogen dependent and several enzymes control the
local availability of these steroids by activating (i.e. aromatase, sulfatase, 17beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 - HSD17B1) or deactivating estrogens
(sulfotransferase,
17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 - HSD17B2).
Imbalances in these enzymes are implied in EC development.
In the present study, it is evaluated whether imbalances in these enzymes are also
associated with EC prognosis.
Tumour tissue collected directly after hysterectomy of 175 EC patients was
included; 141 endometrioid (49 Grade I, 53 Grade II and 39 Grade III) and 34
non-endometrioid tumour types. Most tumours were estrogen receptor positive
(72%). The mRNA levels of aromatase, sulfotransferase, sulfatase, HSD17B1 &
HSD17B2 were measured using micro-array analyses. Patients were clustered
according to the mRNA enzyme levels using quartiles.
It was observed that patients with high HSD17B1 mRNA levels (4th quartile) had
a significantly poorer prognosis compared with patients with low HSD17B1
levels (1st, 2nd and 3th quartiles) (PZ0.007). No significant correlation in the
levels of HSD17B2, aromatase, sulfotransferase, sulfatase and patient prognosis
was observed.
In conclusion, high HSD17B1 mRNA level, predicted to increase the availability
of local estrogens, is correlated with poor prognosis in EC patients. Hence,
HSD17B1  is  a  potential  prognostic  marker.  Validation  of  these  results  in
independent cohorts is required.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP172
GP173
The changing ‘steroid metabolome’ across the spectrum of
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Ahmad Moolla1, Amin Amin2, Bev Hughes2, Wiebke Arlt2, Zaki Hassan-
Smith2, Matt Armstrong3, Philip Newsome3, Tahir Shah3, Luc Van Gaal4,
An Verrijken4, Sven Francque4, Michael Biehl5 & Jeremy Tomlinson1
1Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK;2Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK;3Centre for Liver Research,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK;4University of Antwerp,
Antwerp, Belgium;5University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Introduction
Dysregulated  glucocorticoid
(GC)  metabolism  has  been  implicated  in  the
pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD extends
from  simple  steatosis,  to  inflammation
(steatohepatitis/NASH),  fibrosis  and
consequent cirrhosis. It is often regarded as the hepatic manifestation of the
metabolic syndrome and is independently associated with increased liver and
cardiovascular mortality. Changes in GC metabolism have thus far been described
in small numbers of patients. 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11b-
HSD1) regenerates active cortisol (F) from inactive cortisone (E), whilst A-ring
reductases 5a and 5b reductase (5aR/5bR) inactivate cortisol to dihydro and
subsequently tetrahydro metabolites (THF/5aTHF). Both pathways are impli-
cated in the development and progression of NAFLD.
Methods
Using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, we analysed steroid metabolites in
spot urine samples (corrected for urinary creatinine) in a large cohort of patients
with biopsy proven NAFLD/NASH (nZ39) alongside patients with cirrhosis
(nZ44), and compared them to healthy controls without liver disease (nZ58).
Results
Total urinary cortisol metabolites were significantly different across all three
groups allowing discrete separation (P!0.0001), with the highest levels seen in
patients with NASH. Interestingly, 11b-HSD1 activity (reflected by the THFC
5aTHF/THE ratio) was significantly increased in patients with cirrhosis in
comparison to NASH or healthy controls (P!0.0001). A-ring reductase activity
(THF/5aTHF ratio) did not differ significantly across the three groups. Using
computerized  machine  learning  analysis,  we  identified  distinct  clusters  of
patients, with complete separation between those with cirrhosis and healthy
controls (ROC AUCZ0.99).
Conclusion
We have identified steroid metabolic pathways that appear differentially regulated
across the spectrum of NAFLD. This not only offers the potential to identify
discrete targets amenable to intervention, but through the adoption of an unbiased
computational approach, we have raised the possibility of utilizing this technique
as a non-invasive assessment of the stage and severity of liver disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP173
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP174
5b-reductase (AKR1D1) is a regulator of glucose homeostasis in human
hepatocytes and development of model systems to define its role in
metabolic liver disease
Nikolaou Nikolaos1, James Dunford1, Charlotte Green1, Wenhwa Lee1,
Reina Lim2, Laura Gathercole1, Jane McKeating2, Udo Oppermann1,
Leanne Hodson1 & Jeremy Tomlinson1
1University of Oxford, Oxford, UK;2University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is the hepatic manifestation of the global
epidemic of metabolic disease. Steroid hormones, including glucocorticoids and
sex steroids, regulate metabolic phenotype, and in addition, bile acids have
recently been identified as potent metabolic regulators. 5b-reductase (AKR1D1)
is predominantly expressed in the liver and is a crucial regulator of steroid
hormone clearance as well as bile acid synthesis. Its role in pathogenesis of
metabolic disease has not been examined. We have therefore developed systems
to define the enzymology of human AKR1D1 in cell free assays, to determine the
impact of manipulation of AKR1D1 expression and activity in human hepatocyte
models and we propose that AKR1D1 regulates glucose flux in human liver. B21
bacteria cells were transformed with an AKR1D1 construct and recombinant
protein  extracted  and  purified.  A  high-throughput  assay  was  developed  to
determine AKR1D1 activity, substrate specificity and enzyme kinetics. AKR1D1
activity  was  inhibited  by  Finasteride
(selective
5aR2  inhibitor),  but not
Dutasteride
(non-selective
5aR inhibitor). AKR1D1 mRNA expression  was
characterized in four different hepatoma cell lines (Hep3b, HepG2, C3A and
Huh7.0) as well as primary cultures of human hepatocytes. Over-expression and
siRNA knockdown of AKR1D1 in HepG2 cells were performed and confirmed
using qPCR. Changes in gene expression were paralleled by functional activity
as measured by cortisone clearance and tetrahydrocortisone generation using
GC/MS. AKR1D1 knockdown increased the mRNA expression of the glucose
transporters GLUT1 and GLUT9, as measured by qPCR (GLUT1: 0.6G0.1 vs
1.71G0.1, P!0.05; GLUT9: 0.58G0.05 vs 1.35G0.08, P!0.05). In addition,
AKR1D1 knockdown also increased the extracellular glucose concentration in the
cell culture media (3.7G0.33 vs 5.36G0.5 umol/mg, P!0.05) with evidence of
enhanced gluconeogenesis through increased PEPCK mRNA expression (0.13G
0.03 vs 0.36G0.01AU, P!0.05). AKR1D1 over-expression did not impact upon
cellular metabolic phenotype. We have characterised human AKR1D1 in cell-free
systems and in established liver cell models. Furthermore, we have successfully
manipulated AKR1D1 expression and activity and identified it as a potent
regulator of glucose homeostasis within human hepatocytes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP174
GP175
Differential roles of estrogen receptors (ERa and ERb) in seminiferous
epithelium: in vivo agonist studies in adult rats
Kushaan Dumasia, Anita Kumar & Nafisa Balasinor
National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health, Maharashtra, India.
Estrogen,  through  its  receptors,  plays  an  important  role  in  regulation  of
spermatogenesis. The importance of estrogen is highlighted with the reports
that environmental estrogens have deleterious effects on spermatogenesis and
have been associated with declining sperm counts in men. Although estrogen
receptors (ERa and ERb) have been localised in the seminiferous epithelium;
their precise roles are yet unclear as in vivo estradiol treatment would signal
through both the ERs. It is important to understand the effects of activation of
estrogen  signaling  through  both  the  receptors  since  several  environmental
estrogens  have  different  binding  affinities  to  the  two  ERs.  Hence  we  had
developed in vivo selective ER agonist administration models in adult male rats to
decipher the individual roles of the ERs. Treatment with both ERa and ERb
agonists decreased sperm counts after 60 days of treatment. This study was aimed
at understanding the factors contributed, by the two ERs, to the decreased sperm
counts. Treatment with ERa agonist causes an arrest in differentiation of round
spermatids into elongated spermatids, mainly due to down-regulation of genes
involved in spermiogenesis by activation of estrogen signaling through ERa. ERb
agonist administration reduces sperm counts due to spermiation failure and
spermatocyte apoptosis. Spermiation failure observed was due to defects in
tubulobulbar complex formation because of decrease in expression of genes
involved in actin remodelling. The increase in spermatocyte apoptosis could be
due to increase in oxidative stress conditions and decrease in anti-apoptotic genes.
Our results suggest that the ERs regulate distinct aspects of spermatogenesis. ERa
is mainly involved with regulation of spermiogenesis, while ERb regulates
spermatocyte apoptosis and spermiation. Activation of estrogen signaling through
either  of  the  receptors  can  affect  their  respective  processes  during
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
spermatogenesis and lead to low sperm output. These observations can be useful
in understanding potential effect of environmental estrogens on spermatogenesis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP175
GP176
Luteinizing hormone and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) action
on the same receptor results in different in vitro intracellular signaling
in mouse primary Leydig cells
Francesco De Pascali1, Laura Riccetti1, Francesco Potì1,2,
Simonetta Tagliavini3, Tommaso Trenti3, Manuela Simoni1,2 &
Livio Casarini1,2
1Unit of Endocrinology, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy;2Center
for Genomic Research, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy;3Department of Clinical Pathology, Azienda USL, Modena, Italy.
Luteinizing hormone (LH) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) are two
glycoprotein hormones regulating development and reproduction. Despite binding
the same receptor (LHCGR), they elicit different intracellular signaling. In vitro
non-equivalence of hCG and LH was previously demonstrated in human primary
granulosa cells. The aim of this study is to compare the effects of LH and hCG in
mouse primary Leydig cells in vitro, naturally expressing the murine receptor
(l hr). Although hCG is absent in mice, lhr retains the ability to binds both these
human gonadotropins and shares 80% identity with the human LHCGR. Testis
from 3/5-months-old C57BL6 mice were collected and Leydig cells were isolated
by density gradient, plated and treated by increasing doses of recombinant LH and
hCG (1 pM-100 nM range). We evaluated cAMP production and testosterone
synthesis by ELISA, ERK1/2 and CREB phosphorylation by Western blotting,
gene expression by real-time PCR. Despite no different gene expression and
testosterone production was found, hCG is about 10-fold more potent than LH
in inducing cAMP accumulation (hCG EC50Z18.64G10.14 pM; LH EC50Z
192.00G53.96 pM; Mann-Whitney’s U-test; P!0.05; nZ4) and higher levels of
ERK1/2 (hCG: 6646.1G1492.1; LH: 2214.1G464.8 - relative units) and CREB
(hCG: 2318.3G495.9; LH: 1360G395.3 - relative units) (meansGS.E.M.) (Two-
way Anova and Bonferroni post-test, P!0.05; nZ4) phosphorylation at the
highest dose used (100 nM). We demonstrated that hCG and LH treatment results
in quantitatively but not qualitatively different signaling in Leydig cells in vitro,
differing to that previously described in human primary granulosa cells naturally
expressing the human receptor. The high levels of cAMP/PKA and pERK1/2
activation induced by hCG may rely on not complete aminoacids identity (about
75%) between the LHCGR and lhr hinge regions, which are fundamental for
proper hormone binding and signal transduction. Our results support that LH and
hCG are not equivalent at molecular levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP176
GP177
Characterization of the signaling and testicular functions of bone
morphogenetic protein 8
Fang-Ju Wu & Ching-Wei Luo
Nationaal Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
Previous studies have indicated that targeted depletion of Bmp8 in mice can cause
the reduction of germ cells in the postnatal testis and this further leads to male
infertility, indicative of its importance in the maintenance of spermatogenesis.
However, except the genetic impacts, no direct signaling pathway of BMP8 in cells
has been interpreted in vitro due to the lack of functional BMP8 proteins. To solve
this, we firstly generated different constructs for producing the recombinant BMP8
proteins in the prokaryotic and eukaryotic expression systems. With the bioactive
recombinant BMP8 proteins generated, we found that BMP8 is able to activate the
BMP signaling by promoting the phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8. In the reporter
assays using HEK293T cells, overexpression in combination with knockdown
experiments indicated that ALK3 and ALK6 of the type I receptors and ACVR2A
and BMPR2 of the type II receptors can be the candidates to form the receptor
complex for conducting BMP8-driven signaling. BMP8 was shown to be expressed
in the testis of neonatal mice by immunoblotting and its expression is further
localized  in  spermatogonia  by  immunofluorescence  staining.  In  addition  to
characterization of the receptor identities of BMP8 in spermatogonia, we also
found that BMP8 is able to induce differentiation of spermatogonia by increasing Kit
expression. It also suppressed the expression of the GDNF-mediated self-renewal
genes. Thus, our findings conclude that BMP8, capable of promoting spermatogonia
differentiation at least, participates in the completion of spermatogenesis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP177
GP178
Salivary testosterone to androstenedione (T/A4) ratio is significantly
higher in PCOS patients and accompanied with an adverse metabolic
phenotype
Julia Muenzker1, Lisa Lindheim1, Jo Adaway2, Elisabeth Lerchbaum1,
Thomas Pieber1, Brian Keevil2 & Barbara Obermayer-Pietsch1
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Australia;2Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, Department of Clinical Chemistry,
University Hospital South Manchester, Manchester, UK.
Background
The aim of this study was to evaluate salivary androgen measurements via liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry as a non-invasive tool for the diagnosis of
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and the assessment of metabolic health.
Methods
Saliva and serum samples of 274 patients with PCOS fulfilling Rotterdam criteria
and 51 BMI-matched, premenopausal, healthy controls were analysed for steroid
hormones  using  liquid  chromatography/mass  spectrometry.  The  ratio  of
testosterone to androstenedione (T/A4 ratio) in saliva and serum was assessed
and correlated with parameters of metabolic health.
Results
Serum and saliva levels of testosterone and androstenedione are significantly
higher in PCOS patients (P!0.001 each). PCOS patients also show significantly
higher free testosterone and free dihydrotestosterone levels in serum, as well as a
higher free androgen index (P!0.001 each). Testosterone to androstenedione
ratio is significantly higher in saliva from PCOS patients compared to saliva from
healthy, BMI-matched controls (P!0.001), whereas no significant difference for
the T/A4 ratio in serum was found. Only in PCOS patients, salivary T/A4 ratio is
significantly higher in patients with obesity (PZ0.001), metabolic syndrome
(PZ0.004), insulin resistance (PZ0.016) and glucose intolerance (PZ0.038)
compared to PCOS women without the respective metabolic alterations.
Conclusions
Assessing salivary androgens and calculating the salivary T/A4 ratio could be a
novel, non-invasive tool for the diagnosis of PCOS. Further, a higher T/A4 ratio is
linked with an adverse metabolic phenotype in PCOS patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP178
Reproduction & Endocrine Disruption
GP179
Urinary bisphenol A in PCOS women and its relation to steroid
hormones
Zora Lazurova1, Beata Hubkova2, Maria Marekova2, Jana Figurova1 &
Ivica Lazurova1
1Department of Internal medicine Medical Faculty University Košice,
Košice, Slovakia;2Department of Biochemistry Medical Faculty University
Košice, Košice, Slovakia.
Bisphenol A (BPA) is an environmental estrogen found in plastic material such as
bottles, food package, dental material, etc. It is known to have many negative
effects on human health and its exposure is associated with endocrine disorders
including polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Some studies found significantly
higher serum and urinary levels of BPA in PCOS women, however its association
with steroid hormones is still controversial.
Aim
The aim of this study was to compare urinary BPA concentrations between PCOS
and healthy women and to assess the relationship between BPA and steroid
hormones in PCOS group.
Subjects and methods
Study groups consisted of 69 PCOS women and 38 healthy age matched women
without endocrine disease. BPA concentrations were measured in urine samples
using high-pressure liquid chromatography in all PCOS and control subjects.
Serum  androgens  i.e.  testosterone,  free-testosterone,  androstendione
(ASD),
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and DHEAS as well as serum estrogens (estradiol,
estrone) were measured in PCOS group.
Results
There were no signifcant differences in BPA concentration between PCOS and
controls (6.8G1.1 vs 6.7G1.3 mg/lcreatinine). In the PCOS group, no significant
correlation has been detected between BPA and testosterone, free-testosterone,
DHT, ASD and estradiol (all PO0.05), respectively. However, we found a
significant  negative  correlation  between  BPA  and  DHEAS
(rZK0.59,
PZ0.0065) and a slight but significant negative correlation between BPA and
serum estrone (rZK0.27, PZ0.038).
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
We conclude that PCOS women do not differ in urinary BPA concentrations from
healthy controls. In PCOS group urinary BPA negatively correlates with serum
DHEAS and estrone indicating that BPA may interfere with steroidogenesis and
may inhibit production of some steroid hormones.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP179
GP180
An estrogen receptor-dependent pathway is involved in
fludioxonil-induced cancer growth and metastasis linked with
epithelial mesenchymal transition in cellular and xenografted
ovarian cancer models
Cho-Won Kim, Ryeo-Eun Go & Kyung-Chul Choi
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
Fludioxonil is an antifungal agent used in agricultural applications that is present
at measurable amounts in fruits and vegetables. In this study, the effects of
fludioxonil on cancer cell viability, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
metastasis were examined in BG-1 ovarian cancer cells with estrogen receptors
(ERs). BG-1 cells were cultured with 0.1% DMSO (control), 17b-estradiol (E2;
1!10K9 M),  or  fludioxonil
(10K5K10K8 M).  MTT assay  revealed  that
fludioxonil increased BG-1 cell viability 1.2-1.5 times compared to the control,
while E2 markedly increased BG-1 cell viability by about 3.5 times. When the
samples  were  co-treated  with  ICI
182,780
(10K8 M),  an  ER  antagonist,
fludioxonil-induced BG-1 cell viability was reversed to the level of the control.
Protein levels of cyclin E, cyclin D1, snail and N-cadherin increased in response to
fludioxonil as E2 did, but these increases were not observed when fludioxonil was
administered with ICI 182,780. Moreover, the protein level of p21 and E-cadherin
decreased in response to treatment with fludioxonil, but remained at the control
level when cotreated with ICI 182,780. In xenografted mouse models transplanted
with BG-1 cells, fludioxonil significantly increased the tumor mass formation by
about 2.5 times as E2 did when compared to vehicle (0.1% DMSO) during the
experimental period (80 days). Immunohistochemistry revealed that the protein
level of proliferating cell nuclear antigen, snail and cathepsin D increased in
response to fludioxonil as E2 did. These results imply that fludioxonil may have
disruptive  effects on  ER expressing cancers  by inducing  alterations  in the
expression of cell cycle- and EMT-related genes via the ER dependent pathway.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP180
GP181
Metformin directly alters key glycolytic enzyme protein expression and
mitochondrial function in the endometria of PCOS patients
Ruijin Shao1, Xin Li1,2 & Håkan Billig1,3
1Department of Physiology/Endocrinology, Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden;2Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and
Gynecology Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China;3Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases, Shanghai,
China.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a significant risk factor for the development
and progression of type I endometrial cancer (EC). Currently, it is not known
whether metformin has a direct effect on the endometria and further regulates
glycolysis  and  mitochondrial  function  in  PCOS  patients  with  endometrial
hyperplasia and carcinoma. Here we show that endometria from PCOS patients
with endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma have a distinct protein expression
pattern of glycolytic enzymes, including HK2, PFK, PKM2, and LDHA as well as
mitochondrial TFAM, which is necessary for energy production from oxidative
phosphorylation. Using endometrial tissues from PCOS patients with hyperplasia,
we evaluated the effects of metformin on the protein levels of key enzymes in
glycolysis in vitro. In response to metformin treatment, HK2 expression was
decreased, whereas PFK, PKM2, and LDHA expression was increased compared
to controls. Interestingly, the expression of TFAM and cleaved caspase-3, a
downstream target of cytochrome C, was increased after metformin treatment. It
is known that type I EC is an estrogen-dependent disease and that endometrial
hyperplasia  predisposes  for  the  development  of  EC.  We  found  that  while
endometrial ERb expression was no different between non-PCOS and PCOS
patients, ERa expression was gradually increased in women with PCOS following
the onset of endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma. Moreover, we found that
in vitro treatment with metformin leads to inhibition of ERa expression without
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
affecting ERb expression. Overall, our data indicate that metformin integrates
endometrial glycolytic metabolism with mitochondria-related cellular function by
regulating key glycolytic enzyme protein expression in the endometrium. Our
results also show that ERa is a molecular link between metformin action and
estrogen-induced endometrial cell proliferation, and they shed further light on the
anticancer mechanism of metformin in PCOS patients with EC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP181
GP182
Elevated circulating levels of betatrophin are associated with polycystic
ovary syndrome
Mehmet Calan1, Ozgur Yilmaz2, Tuncay Kume3, Gokcen Unal Kocabas1,
Pinar Yesil Senses4, Yasar Mehmet Senses5, Muzaffer Temur2 &
Ozlem Gursoy Calan3
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine (PCOS Research Group), Bozyaka Training and Research
Hospital, Izmir, Turkey;2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (PCOS
Research Group), Manisa Merkezefendi State Hospital, Manisa, Turkey;
3Department of Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, Dokuz Eylul
University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey;4Department of Bioengi-
neering, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey;5Department of Biotechnology,
Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.
Context
Betatrophin is a newly identified hormone appreciated for its role as a potent
inducer of beta cell proliferation in line with insulin resistance in mice. Polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an inflammatory-based metabolic disease associated
with insulin resistance. However, no evidence was available whether betatrophin
is involved in women with PCOS.
Objective
To ascertain whether betatrophin levels are altered in women with PCOS.
Setting
Secondary referral center.
Participants
A total of 164 women with PCOS and 164 age- and BMI- matched female
controls without PCOS were recruited for this cross-sectional study.
Main outcome measures
Circulating  betatrophin  levels  were  measured  using  ELISA;  metabolic  and
hormonal parameters were also determined.
Results
Circulating betatrophin levels were significantly elevated in women with PCOS
compared with controls (367.09G55.78 vs 295.65G48.97 pg/ml, P!0.001).
Betatrophin levels were positively correlated with insulin resistance marker
HOMA-IR, free-testosterone, hs-CRP, atherogenic lipid profiles and BMI in
PCOS. In multivariate logistic regression analysis, the odds of subjects in the
highest  quartile
(ORZ2.51,  95%  CIZ1.31-4.81,  PZ0.006)  of  betatrophin
having PCOS were significantly increased compared with subjects the lowest
quartile betatrophin. Multivariate regression analyses showed that HOMA-IR,
hs-CRP  and  free-testosterone  were  independent  factors  influencing  serum
betatrophin levels.
Conclusion
Betatrophin levels were increased in women with PCOS and were associated with
insulin  resistance,  hs-CRP  and  free-testosterone  in  these  patients.  Elevated
betatrophin levels were found to increase the odds of having PCOS. The phy-
siologic and pathologic significance of our findings remain to be further elucidated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP182
GP183
Intima media thickness and brachial artery flow mediated dilatation in
women with polycystic ovary syndrome and type 1 diabetes mellitus
Agnieszka Lebkowska1, Agnieszka Adamska1, Joanna Tolwinska2,
Malgorzata Jacewicz1, Justyna Hryniewicka1, Robert Milewski3,
Slawomir Wolczynski4, Artur Bossowski2, Maria Gorska1 &
Irina Kowalska1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine,
Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland;2Department of
Pediatrics, Endocrinology, Diabetology with Cardiology Division, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland;3Department of Statistics and
Medical Informatics, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland;
4Department of Reproduction and Gynecological Endocrinology, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and type 1 diabetes (T1DM) are accompanied
by increased risk of atherosclerosis. A higher prevalence of PCOS in T1DM
patients has been reported. Brachial artery flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) and
intima media thickness of common carotid artery (IMT) are used to detect an
early endothelial dysfunction.
The aim of our study was to examine IMT and FMD in T1DM women with
PCOS. We also estimated the relation of IMT and FMD to clinical and hormonal
parameters in the studied population.
We studied 85 women (mean age 25.1G4.3): 27 with T1DM (14 with PCOSC
T1DM, 13 with T1DM/no-PCOS), 38 with PCOS and 20 healthy women (control
group). IMT and FMD were assessed by ultrasonography. PCOS was diagnosed
using the Rotterdam criteria. Clinical examination, lipid, hormonal profile and
ultrasonographic  evaluation  of  ovaries  were  performed  for  all  women.  In
addition,  concentrations  of  soluble  E-selectin
(sE-selectin)  and  intercellular
adhesion cell molecule-1 (sICAM-1), as well as C-reactive protein (CRP) levels
were assessed.
IMT and FMD did not differ between all studied groups. In patients with PCOSC
T1DM, the median IMT value was 0.53 mm (IQR 0.44-0.54) and median FMD
value was 12.66% (IQR 9.5-20.43). IMT was positively associated with BMI
in the entire studied group and in patients with PCOS (rZ0.357, PZ0.001;
rZ0.342, PZ0.036). IMT was also related to CRP, sE-selectin and sICAM-1 in
the entire group (rZ0.261, PZ0.044; rZ0.23, PZ0.033; rZ0.29, PZ0.007).
sE-selectin and sICAM-1 concentrations were higher in PCOSCT1DM than in
PCOS group (PZ0.002, PZ0.006). In the T1DM group, we found FMD to be
related  to  diabetes  duration
(rZK0.42,  PZ0.033).  In  the  T1DMCPCOS
patients, IMT was related to serum triglycerides (rZ0.613, PZ0.02) and to HDL-
cholesterol (rZK0.524, PZ0.055).
Our data suggest that early vascular changes in young T1DM patients are related
to  diabetes  duration  and  additionally,  in  patients  with  PCOSCT1DM,  to
atherogenic lipid profile.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP183
GP184
Impaired DHEA sulfation defines androgen excess in women with
polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
Punith Kempegowda1,2, Michael W O’Reilly1,2, Zaki Hassan-Smith1,2,
Karl-Heinz Storbeck3, Angela E Taylor1,2 & Wiebke Arlt1,2
1Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, Birmingham, UK;
2Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Birmingham, UK;
3Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
Context
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine disorder in
women of classic androgen synthesis. Recent work has highlighted that impaired
DHEA sulfation results in enhanced androgen production. Here, we evaluated the
relationship between DHEA and DHEAS and androgen excess and metabolic
phenotype in PCOS.
Patients and methods
We compared 65 women with PCOS to 35 healthy women matched for age
and body mass index (BMI). All subjects underwent measurement of fasting
glucose and insulin for Homeostatic Model Assessment for Insulin Resistance
(HOMA-IR). Androgen status was assessed in serum and 24-h urine by mass
spectrometry. Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient analysis, Fishers
exact test and one-way ANOVA were used for statistical analysis.
Results
Women with PCOS showed evidence of impaired DHEA sulfation as indicated by
a significantly higher DHEA/DHEAS ratio (median 6.9 (range 0.4-28.0) vs 1.8
(0.5-3.7) nmol/mmol in controls, P!0.0001). For further analysis, we divided the
PCOS patients according to whether their DHEA/DHEAS ratio was normal,
i.e. similar to controls, (!5 nmol/mmol, nZ24) or increased (R5 nmol/mmol,
nZ41). The two PCOS groups did not differ with regard to BMI or HOMA-IR.
PCOS patients with an increased DHEA/DHEAS ratio had significantly increased
excretion of both major androgen metabolites, androsterone and etiocholanolone,
reflective of total androgen production (androsterone (median 2496 (IQR 1645-
4350) mg/24 h vs 1214 (827-1815) mg/24 h in controls, PZ0.0002; etiocholano-
lone
(2076
(1483-3005) mg/24 h  vs
1133
(717.5-1910) mg/24 h  in  controls,
PZ0.0069). By contrast, androgen production in PCOS patients with normal
DHEA/DHEAS ratio did not differ significantly from controls.
Conclusion
The DHEA/DHEAS ratio is an independent and sensitive indicator of androgen
excess in PCOS. Impaired DHEA sulfation is much more prevalent in PCOS than
previously assumed, with two thirds of PCOS patients showing an increased
DHEA/DHEAS ratio closely linked to total androgen production.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP184
GP185
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin supports Treg-mediated fetal
protection in mice by modulating DC phenotype
Anne Schumacher, Dominique Sporke, Stefanie Ehrentraut & Ana Claudia
Zenclussen
Experimental Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Faculty,
Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.
Introduction
Human  Chorionic  Gonadotropin
(hCG)  contributes  to  fetal  tolerance  by
regulating innate and adaptive immune responses during pregnancy. Our previous
results suggested a pregnancy protective effect of hCG through enhancement of
regulatory T (Treg) cells and inhibition of dendritic cell (DC) maturation. Here,
we  aimed  to  investigate  whether  hCG  contributes  to  Treg  generation  by
modulating DC phenotype in vitro and in vivo in a murine model.
Methods
Bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) from virgin CBA/J female mice were
in vitro stimulated with LPS and IFN-g to induce maturation. In parallel, BMDCs
were cultured in the presence of various concentrations of urine-purified or
recombinant hCG. After 24 and 48 h the BMDCs were analyzed for their
maturation state and cytokine secretion pattern. Additionally, BMDCs were
analyzed for their capability to induce the differentiation of naïve T cells into
TH1, TH2 or Treg cells.
Moreover, hCG-  and non  hCG-treated  stimulated  BMDCs  were  adoptively
transferred into abortion-prone mice to evaluate their in vivo function. On
pregnancy day 12 the pregnancy outcome as well as the peripheral and local
number of Treg cells was determined.
Results
BMDC stimulation resulted in a significant increase in the number of mature
BMDCs and in secretion of TH1 and TH2 cytokines. Both hCG preparations
significantly impaired the ability of BMDCs to mature but did not significantly
influence cytokine secretion. As for their function, recombinant hCG-treated
BMDCs had a reduced potential to induce TH1 or Th2 cells but could increase the
number of Treg cells. In vivo, the transfer of hCG-treated BMDCs increased the
number  of  peripheral  and  local  Treg  cells  and  protected  fetuses  from
immunological abortion.
Conclusions
Our results reveal that hCG contributes to Treg-mediated fetal protection by
modulating the phenotype of DCs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP185
GP186
FSH increases the different LH- and hCG-dependent intracellular
signalling and the downstream life/death signals in vitro
Livio Casarini1,2, Laura Riccetti1, Francesco De Pascali1, Alessia Nicoli3,
Simonetta Tagliavini4, Tommaso Trenti4, Giovanni Battista La Sala3,5 &
Manuela Simoni1,2
1Unit of Endocrinology, Department Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy;2Center
for the Genomic Research, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Modena, Italy;3Unit of Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS-Arcispedale
Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy;4Department of Clinical
Pathology, Azienda USL, Modena, Italy;5Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults, University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
Background
Luteinizing  hormone
(LH)  and  choriogonadotropin
(hCG)  are  glycoprotein
hormones regulating ovarian function and pregnancy. They were routinely used in
assisted reproduction techniques (ART) assuming they are equivalent, due to their
binding to a common receptor (LHCGR). However, differences between LH and
hCG were demonstrated at molecular and physiological level.
Aim
The aim of this study is to evaluate how follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
co-treatment, in the ART therapeutic dose-range, affects the different LH- and
hCG-specific responses in vitro.
Methods
We  evaluated  phospho-CREB,  -ERK1/2  and  -AKT  activation  by  Western
blotting, gene expression by real-time PCR, cAMP, progesterone and estradiol
production by ELISA, and cell viability by MTT assay in human granulosa-lutein
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
cells (hGLC). LH and hCG dose-response experiments (0.1 pM-1.0 nM range)
were performed, in the presence of 10 nM FSH.
Results
In the presence of FSH, hCG biopotency is about 5-fold increased, in cAMP
activation. Moreover, different LH and hCG dose-response curves were observed,
in terms of 50% effective doses (EC50s), hill-slopes and maximal levels (Mann-
Whitney’s  U-test;  P!0.05;  nZ6),  suggesting  hormone-specific  receptor
cooperativity  and  biopotency.  Accordingly,  the  cAMP-dependent  CREB
phosphorylation  and  steroid  production  increased  under  hCG  and  FSH
co-treatment. Surprisingly, the activation of the steroidogenic cAMP/PKA/CREB
signalling cascade did not change upon LH treatment, in the presence of FSH.
However, FSH increased the LH-dependent ERK1/2 and AKT phosphorylation,
the expression of the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) gene, and the cell
viability (Mann-Whitney’s U-test; P!0.05; nZ4), resulting in anti-apoptotic
effects.
Conclusions
FSH potentiates the LH-dependent anti-apoptotic and the hCG steroidogenic (and
pro-apoptotic) potential in vitro. The different modulatory activity of FSH on LH
and hCG action in vitro reflects their different physiological functions, consisting
in proliferative effects exerted by LH during the follicular phase and before
trophoblast development, and the high steroidogenic potential of hCG requested
to sustain pregnancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP186
GP187
Testosterone supplementation and body composition: results from a
meta-analysis of observational studies
Giovanni Corona1, Vito A Giagulli2, Elisa Maseroli3, Linda Vignozzi3,
Antonio Aversa4,5, Michael Zitzmann6, Farid Saad7 & Mario Maggi3
1Endocrinology Unit, Medical Department, Azienda Usl Bologna
Maggiore-Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy;2Unit of Metabolic Diseases
and Endocrinology, Conversano, Italy;3Andrology and Sexual Medicine
Unit, Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy;4Department of Experimental and
Clinical Medicine, University Magna Graecia, Rome, Italy;5Department of
Experimental Medicine Sapienza, University of Rome, Rome, Italy;
6
Centre for Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Munster, Germany;
7Bayer Pharma, Global Medical Affairs Andrology, Berlin, Germany.
Background
The concept of testosterone (T) supplementation (TS) as a new anti-obesity
medication in men with testosterone deficiency syndrome (TDS) is emerging.
Aim
To systematically review and meta-analyze available observational and register
studies reporting data on body composition in studies on TS in TDS.
Methods
An extensive Medline Embase and Cochrane search was performed including the
following words: ‘testosterone’, ‘body composition’.
Main outcome measures
All observational studies comparing the effect of TS on body weight and other
body composition and metabolic endpoints were considered.
Results
Out of 824 retrieved articles, 32 were included in the study enrolling 4513
patients. TS was associated with a time-dependent reduction of body weight and
waist circumference (WC). The estimated weight loss and WC reduction at
24 months were K3.50 (K5.21; K1.80) kg and K6.23 (K7.94; K4.76) cm,
respectively. TS was also associated with a significant reduction of fat (K0.62
(K1.06; K0.18); P!0.01) and with an increase of lean mass (0.62 (0.18; 1.05);
P!0.01) as well as with a reduction of fasting glycemia and insulin resistance. In
addition, an improvement of lipid profile (reduction of total cholesterol as well as
of triglyceride levels and an improvement in HDL cholesterol levels) and in both
systolic and diastolic blood pressure were observed.
Conclusions
Present data support the view of a positive effect of TS on body composition and
on glucose and lipid metabolism. In addition, a significant effect on body weight
loss was observed, which should be confirmed by a specifically designed RCT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP187
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP188
Human 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency associated with a
normal spermatic numeration despite a severe enzyme deficit, after an
accomplished transition period
Bruno Donadille1, Sylvie Cabrol2, Muriel Houang2, Yves Lebouc2,
Yves Morel3, Irene Netchine2 & Sophie Christin-Maitre1
1Service d’endocrinologie et médecine de la reproduction, Centre de
Référence des Maladies Endocrines Rares de la Croissance, Hopital Saint
Antoine, Groupe Hospitalier Universitaire Est, Assistance Pub, Paris,
France;2Service d’explorations fonctionnelles endocriniennes, Centre de
Référence des Maladies Endocrines Rares de la Croissance, Hopital Armand
Trousseau, Groupe Hospitalier Universitaire Est, Assistance Pub, Paris,
France;3Hôpital Debrousse, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, Lyon,
France.
Human 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency is a rare form of congenital
adrenal  hyperplasia  resulting  from  HSD3B2
gene  mutations,  leading  to
steroidogenesis impairment in both adrenals and gonads. The transition period
is important for a successful adult fertility, but information about fertility is
lacking in this rare disease.
The  patient  presented  with salt wasting at birth  in Trousseau  Hospital.
Consanguinity was present, since the parents were first cousins. A micropenis
and two intrascrotal testes were noted, a perineal hypospadias was later surgically
corrected. Highly elevated 17OH-Pregnenolone contrasting with low 17OH-
Progesterone and an HSD3B2 687del27 homozygous mutation (Moisan et al;
JCEM 1999) were described: in vitro activity of this mutation in terms of
DHEA/D4-Dione conversion was very low. Despite high ACTH levels in infancy,
SDHEA levels remains controlled, without dexamethasone treatment use. Normal
puberty was achieved at age 15. After transition from the pediatric department at
age 19, the compliance was good and his hormonal profile remains normal with
Hydrocortisone 30 mg/day and Fludrocortisone 100 mg/day: 17OHPregnenolone
2.2 nM (N: 1.5-10.8); SDHA 2.6 mM (N: 3-14); total testosterone 28 nM (N:
11-40); ACTH 21 pg/ml; renin 18.1 pg/ml (N: 5-30). Testicular echography
found two scrotal testes of 21 ml without any evidence of testicular adrenal rest
tumors. No malignancy was noted, as the testes remains in the scrotal position.
Plasma inhibin B (139 pg/ml; N: 135-350) confirmed a normal Sertoli’s function.
Finally, his spermatic numeration was quite normal according to WHO 2010
criteria, with 57.6 million/ml spermatozoids, although typical forms were 21%
and vitality was 41% (NO58%), which allowed sperm cryopreservation.
This case illustrates potential male fertility in a patient with severe HSD3B2
deficiency and the importance of transition, which allowed a long term hormonal
control and therefore exocrine consequences, questioning the testicular role of the
peripheral, non-mutated, testicular HSD3B1.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP188
Thyroid - Basic
GP189
A new paradigm of TSH receptor signaling in the trans-Golgi network
Amod Godbole1,2, Sandra Lyga1,2, Martin J Lohse1,2 & Davide Calebiro1,2
1Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany;2Rudolf Virchow Center, University of Wurzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany.
Whereas G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) have been long believed to signal
through cyclic AMP exclusively at cell surface, our group has previously shown
that GPCRs not only signal at the cell surface but can also continue doing so once
internalized together with their ligands, leading to persistent cAMP production.
This phenomenon, which we originally described for the thyroid stimulating
hormone receptor (TSHR) in thyroid cells, has been observed also for other
GPCRs.  However,  the  intracellular  compartment(s)  responsible  for  such
persistent  signaling  and  its  consequences  on  downstream  effectors  were
insufficiently characterized. The aim of this study was to follow by live-cell
imaging the trafficking of internalized TSHRs and other involved signaling
proteins as well as to understand the consequences of signaling by internalized
TSHRs on the downstream activation of protein kinase A (PKA). PKA activity
was measured in real-time in living thyroid cells using a fluorescence resonance
energy  transfer
(FRET)  sensor
(AKAR2).  Our  results  suggest  that  TSH
co-internalizes with its receptor and that the internalized TSH/TSHR complexes
traffic retrogradely to the trans-Golgi network (TGN). We provide evidence that
TSH/TSHR complexes meet an intracellular pool of Gas in the TGN and activate
it there, as visualized in real-time using a nanobody that binds selectively to
the active Gs protein. Acute Brefeldin A-induced Golgi collapse hinders the
retrograde  trafficking  of  TSH/TSHR  complexes,  leading  to  reduced  cAMP
production. Direct monitoring of PKA activation in the TGN with a localized
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
AKAR2  sensor  shows  a  delayed  PKA  activation  after  TSH  stimulation
(w10 min),  which  is  compatible  with the  time  required for TSH/TSHR
complexes to reach the TGN. These data provide evidence that internalized
TSH/TSHR complexes meet and activate G-proteins at the TGN, leading to a
local activation of PKA. These findings suggest unexpected functions for receptor
internalization, with major pathophysiological and pharmacological implications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP189
GP190
Functional and morphological phenotypes in the mouse thyroid gland
associated with thyroid-specific Mct8 deficiency
Daniel Boland1, Jonas Weber1, Maren Rehders1, Lisa Rodermund1,
Heike Heuer2 & Klaudia Brix1
1Department of Life Sciences and Chemistry, Jacobs University Bremen,
Bremen, Germany;2Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental
Medicine, Dusseldorf, Germany.
Introduction
Mct8 is a thyroid hormone specific transporter located at the basolateral plasma
membrane of thyrocytes. To investigate the significance of Mct8 to the thyroid
gland while excluding peripheral effects observed in global knockout models, we
used a Cre-LoxP thyroid-specific Mct8-deficient mouse model. Phenotypes of the
angiofollicular unit encompassing the follicle and surrounding endothelial cells
were investigated with respect to functional and morphological states.
Methods
Morphology of the thyroid follicles, endothelial cells and thyrocyte cell death
were  investigated  using  a  computer-based  cell  biology  toolbox.  Indirect
immunofluorescence of tissue cryo-sections and immunoblotting were used to
analyse  thyroglobulin  status,  along  with  expression  and  localisation  of
thyroglobulin-processing cathepsins.
Results
Morphological analysis demonstrates that the average thyroid follicle size in
thyroid-specific  Mct8-deficient  mice  is  comparable  to  the  CreK/K  control.
Epithelial  extension  was  less  in  thyroid-specific-Mct8
deficiency,  but  not
significantly. Strikingly, cell death in the thyroid-specific Mct8-deficient mice
was 8.5-fold greater  than  observed  in the control. Cathepsin B expression
appeared increased 1.7-fold in the thyroid-specific Mct8 knockout in comparison
to the control. Cathepsin L is only localised to certain thyrocytes around the
follicle in the thyroid-specific-Mct8 deficient model; in the control, Cathepsin L is
present across all thyrocytes. Initial observations of the thyroglobulin status
suggest that a greater percentage of the prohormone in the thyroid-specific Mct8
knockout is cross-linked than the control.
Conclusion
Thyroid-specific Mct8 deficiency does not appear to have a great effect on follicle
size or epithelial extension. However, differences associated with cathepsin
expression and localisation suggests that Mct8 may be connected to expression
and localisation of cathepsins B and L via an unknown mechanism. The absence
of thyrocyte survival factor cathepsin L from many follicle cells might be the
underlying cause of the increased cell death rate in follicles of the thyroid-
specific-Mct8 deficient model.
Funded by DFG, BR1308/11-1, 2
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP190
GP191
Chemical chaperones rescue pathogenic MCT8 mutations
Doreen Braun & Ulrich Schweizer
Institut fur Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Bonn, Germany.
Introduction
Monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) is a thyroid hormone-specific trans-
membrane transport protein. Inactivating mutations in MCT8 lead to severe
mental retardation, the Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome. The severity of the
Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome differs among MCT8 patients. Partial activity
of MCT8 can be caused either by mutations affecting the transport mechanism
(e.g.  substrate  interaction,  conformational  change)  or  by  inefficient  protein
expression, membrane translocation or stability. The latter MCT8 mutants may be
responsive  to  chemical  chaperones  which  stabilize  the  protein  or  support
membrane  localization.  We  have  previously  shown  that  application  of  the
chemical chaperone sodium phenylbutyrate rescues expression and transport
activity of the pathogenic DPhe501 mutant in vitro.
Methods
Several  mutations  were  introduced  into  human  MCT8
by  site  directed
mutagenesis and stably transfected into MDCK1 (Madin-Darby canine kidney)
cells. The cells were treated with increasing concentrations of chaperones for two
days. Western blotting and radioactive thyroid hormone-uptake experiments were
performed to analyze chaperone effects.
Results
Here we will show new mutants (e.g. L434W) which are responsive to sodium
phenylbutyrate. It increases protein expression and function of various pathogenic
MCT8 mutations.
Conclusion
MCT8 mutations do not only affect the transport activity of the protein, but also
its stability and localization at the cell surface. Sodium phenylbutyrate is a
common drug used for the treatment of urea cycle defects and cystic fibrosis. The
administration of chemical chaperones, which are safe for use in humans, could
be a new tool for the therapy of MCT8 deficiency to improve the patient’s quality
of life.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP191
GP192
FoxE1 expression is regulated by Sox9 in thyroid follicular cells
Arístides López-Marquez, Carlos Carrasco Lopez & Pilar Santisteban
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas “Alberto Sols” CSIC-UAM,
Madrid, Spain.
Sox9 is a transcription factor of the HMG box DNA binding family involved in
chondrocyte  differentiation,  sexual  determination  and  the  development  of
endoderm-derived-organs. Preliminary results from our laboratory have shown
that Sox9 is expressed in the thyroid gland and its regulation is under the control
of TSH and TGFb. In this work we studied the role of Sox9 in the thyroid cells
differentiation and its relationship with the other thyroid transcription factors,
mainly  with  FoxE1,  an  important  transcription  factor  essential  for  the
development and differentiation of the thyroid gland.
Sox9 and FoxE1 mRNA and protein levels were determined by RT-qPCR and
Western-blot respectively. Co-transfections assays with FoxE1 promoter and
Sox9 expression vector were performed in Hela cells to elucidate the role of Sox9
in the regulation of Foxe1 expression. The binding capacity of Sox9 to its DNA
consensus sequence in the rat Foxe1 promoter was analyzed by Electrophoretic
Mobility Shift Assays (EMSA). Sox9 was silenced in PCCl3 cells using specific
siRNA.
By in silico analysis we have observed a Sox9 consensus DNA sequence within
the  FoxE1  promoter,  to  which  recombinant  Sox9  protein  efficiently  binds.
Furthermore, we have demonstrated that Sox9 is functional as it was able to
induce four fold the transcriptional activity of FoxE1 promoter. Finally, the
inhibition of Sox9 led to a drastic decrease in the expression levels of FoxE1.
These results show that Sox9 is a transcription factor upstream of FoxE1 and
involved in its regulation in differentiated thyroid follicular cells. Considering the
important role of FoxE1 in the pathophysiology of the thyroid gland these results
encourage to think that Sox9 could play an important role in the regulation of
development and differentiation of the thyroid gland.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP192
GP193
Interconnection between cathepsin protein levels and thyroid hormone
transporters in human thyroid epithelial cells
Cise Kizilirmak1, Maria Qatato1, Jonas Weber1, Maren Rehders1,
Dagmar Fuhrer2 & Klaudia Brix1
1Jacobs University, Bremen, Germany;2University Hospital Essen, Essen,
Germany.
Background
Thyroid hormone transporting proteins Mct8 and Mct10 have been detected
at the plasma membrane of thyroid epithelial cells, whereas Lat2 was found
predominantly at vesicular membranes. In this study we look into the effects
of  inhibiting  thyroid  hormone  transporters  on  their  subcellular  localisation
to better understand their fate and trafficking pathways in thyrocytes. Thus, a
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
pharmacological intervention study with specific inhibitors of thyroid hormone
transporters was conducted using a human thyroid epithelial cell line as a model.
Method
The localization of the thyroid hormone transporters Mct8, Mct10, and Lat2 was
analyzed in human Nthy-ori 3-1 thyroid epithelial cells by indirect immuno-
fluorescence, and the protein levels were determined by immunoblotting.
Results
Although Mct8 and Mct10 have been shown to be located at the basolateral
plasma membrane domain of thyroid follicle cells in situ, our results of this
in vitro study reveal their localization in vesicles. Lat2
was predominantly
vesicular, both in situ and in vitro. In order to identify whether these vesicles
belong to the secretory or the endocytic pathway, co-localization studies with
Lamp2 as an endo-lysosomal marker were performed. The results suggest that
Lat2 is present in vesicles other than late endosomes or lysosomes.
Conclusion
Nthy-ori 3-1 cells represent an in vitro-model suited to study the expression,
localization, and trafficking of thyroid hormone transporters like Lat2, Mct8, and
Mct10. Future studies will have to include other compartment-specific markers to
identify  the  subcellular  location  of  endogenous  and over-expressed  thyroid
hormone transporters in thyrocytes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP193
GP194
Circulating 3-T1AM and 3,5-T2 in critically ill patients:
a cross-sectional observational study
Lies Langouche1, Ina Lehmphul2, Sarah Vander Perre1, Josef Kohrle2 &
Greet Van den Berghe1
1Clinical Division and Laboratory of Intensive Care Medicine, Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;
2Institut fuer Experimentelle Endokrinologie, Charité-Universitatsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
Introduction
Patients in need of an intensive care unit (ICU) treatment due to severe diseases
often develop the non-thyroidal illness syndrome (NTI). These critically ill
patients present with low thyroxine (T4), low 3,3’,5-triiodothyronine (T3) and
elevated reverse T3 (rT3) serum concentrations while TSH and 3,3’-diiodothyr-
onine
(3,3’-T2)  concentrations  remain  unaffected.  To  further  elucidate  the
underlying  changes  in  thyroid  hormone
(TH)  metabolism,  additional  TH
metabolites of physiological and pathophysiological relevance were determined
in sera of ICU patients.
Study design
In this cross-sectional observational study blood was drawn from 83 ICU patients
who were followed up during their ICU stay. 25 developed sepsis and 10 patients
did  not  survive  ICU  stay.  The  control  group  consists  of
38  healthy  and
demographically matched individuals.
Methods
TH and their binding proteins were measured with commercial assays. 3,5-T2 and
3-T1AM were determined with published in-house immunoassays.
Results
Classical TH function tests documented a NTI constellation. Median 3-T1AM
concentrations were 44% lower throughout the ICU stay compared to the healthy
control (P!0.0001). 3-T1AM is not different in survivors vs. non-survivors or
sepsis vs. non-sepsis patients. Median 3,5-T2 concentrations were 30% higher in
critically ill patients compared to the control group (PZ0.01). In addition, we
also observed that non-survivors and ICU patients with diagnosed sepsis had
higher 3,5-T2 concentrations compared to other ICU patients. 3-T1AM but not
3,5-T2 correlates with low T3.
Conclusion
We found highest 3,5-T2 and low 3-T1AM values in most severely ill patients
3
(non-survivors  and  sepsis  patients).  This  data  may  indicate  enhanced  T
deiodination to
3,5-T2 concomitant with decreased 3,5-T2 elimination. The
observation that 3-T1AM concentration does not change with severity of illness
or is even declining with decreasing T3, is compatible with our hypothesis that
3,5-T2 serves as substrate for a decarboxylase yielding 3-T1AM, whose activity is
impaired in severe NTI on ICU.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP194
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP195
Accumulation of PD-1-positve and PD-L1-positve T and B lymphocytes
in patients with Graves’ disease
Aleksandra Pyzik1,2, Ewelina Grywalska2, Beata Matyjaszek-Matuszek1,
Ewa Kiszczak-Bochynska1 & Jacek Rolinski2
1Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland;
2Department of Immunology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland.
Introduction
Programmed death-1 (PD-1) is one of the most important inhibitory co-receptors.
Studies show  that the  PD-1/PD-L1
pathway  regulates  the  induction  and
maintenance of peripheral tolerance and protects tissues from autoimmune attack
in physiological conditions. Several studies have shown association of PD-1/PD-
L1 pathway with several autoimmune diseases although, to date, no such studies
have been performed for Graves’ disease (GD).
Aims
The aim of this study was to describe the frequencies of T and B lymphocytes
expressing PD-1 and PD-L1 molecules in patients with GD. The relationships
between PD-1C and PD-L1C cells, and selected clinical parameters were also
assessed.
Material and methods
The expression of PD-1 and PD-L1 was analyzed using flow cytometry on T and
B lymphocytes collected from 45 adult patients with newly diagnosed, untreated
GD. The control group consisted of 20 healthy subjects.
Results
We observed high expression of PD-1 and PD-L1 on analyzed lymphocytes
subpopulations of GD patients. Among T cells, the expression of PD-1 on protein
level was higher on CD4C cells in GD patients (mean: 31.54G13.74%) than in
healthy controls (mean: 5.35G1.54%, P!0.001). Moreover, higher frequencies
of PD-1C/CD8C cells and PD-1C/CD19C cells in the study group than in
healthy  volunteers  were  observed
(mean:
18.71G10.37%  vs  3.6G1.45%,
PZ0.015 and 12.07G4.34% vs 1.67G0.84%, PZ0.017, respectively). There
was a positive correlation of PD-1 and PD-L1 expressions on CD19CB cells
(rZ0.43, PZ0.026) in patients with GD, and a positive correlation of the
frequencies of PD-1C/CD4C cells and the serum concentration of anti-TPO
antibodies
(rZ0.61,  PZ0.014).  Interestingly,  there  was  also  a  positive
correlation between the frequencies of PD-1C/CD19C cells and the serum
concentration of anti-TR antibodies (rZ0.53, PZ0.019).
Conclusion
High expression of PD-1 and PD-L1 on T and B cells could represent the hallmark
of immune system reaction to chronic antigenic exposition in patients with GD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP195
GP196
Determination of thyroid hormones in small amount of mouse tissue
sample using new isotope-dilution liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry method
Meri De Angelis1, Brian Finan2, Christoffer Clemmensen2, Timo Mueller2,
Matthias Tschoep2, Florian Giesert3 & Karl-Werner Schramm1,4
1Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen - German Research Center for Environ-
mental Health (GmbH), Molecular EXposomics, Neuherberg, Germany;
2Institute for Diabetes and Obesity & Helmholtz Diabetes Center,
Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen - German Research Center for Environmental
Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany;3Technische Universitat Munchen-
Weihenstephan, Lehrstuhl fur Entwicklungsgenetik, c/o Helmholtz Zentrum
Munchen, Neuherberg, Germany;4Technische Universitat Munchen,
Wissenschaftszentrum Weihenstephan fur Ernährung, Landnutzung und
Umwelt, Department fur Biowissenschaften, Freising, Germany.
Thyroid hormones (THs) play a critical role in the regulation of growth and
development in both animals and humans. They regulate metabolism primarily
through actions in the brain, white fat, brown fat, skeletal muscle, liver and
pancreas. Therefore, it is not surprising that since a long time scientists have been
interested in measuring TH concentration in different tissues and to relate this
value  with  possible  dysfunctions.  In  general,  TH  levels  are  measured  by
immunoassay (IA)-based methods, however several analytical procedures using
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and tandem mass spec-
trometry (LC-MS/MS) have been developed recently for the quantification of
thyroid hormones. These new techniques proved to be more accurate than the IA
analysis, but most of them employed rat tissue for TH measurement and required
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
more than 200 mg of sample. This quantity can be considered too high especially
when preclinical studies are conducted using mice as test subjects, thus an
analytical method that reduces the amount of sample is essential. In this study, we
developed a procedure for the quantification of six THs; L-thyroxine (T4), 3,30 ,5-
triiodo-L-thyronine (T3), 3,30 ,50 -triiodo-L-thyronine (rT3), 3,5-diiodo-L-thyronine
(rT2),
3,30 -diiodo-L-thyronine
(T2),
3-iodo-L-thyronine
(T1)  using  isotope
(13C-T4,
13C-T3,
13C-rT3,
13C-T2)  dilution  liquid  chromatography-mass
spectrometry. The major difference with previously described methods lies in
the utilization of a nano-UPLC system in micro configuration. This approach lead
to a reduction of column internal diameter, flow rate, and injected volume. The
results of all these improvements brought a decrease in the amount of sample
necessary for the analysis. The method was initially tested to quantify the TH
level in liver and then it was extended to kidney, heart, and lung. The new
procedure allowed us to measure TH concentration using between 21 and 92 mg
of tissue sample. With this method we reduced substantially the amount of tissue
necessary for analysis, with respect to analogue methods described in literature.
We consider this procedure suitable for analysis of small quantity of samples and
it opens the way for a more routine testing of mouse tissues by LC-MS technique.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP196
GP197
Evaluation of interrelations between resistin, adiponectin, PAI-1,
intercellular adhesion molecule and thyroid function in autoimmune
thyroid disease
Celestino Neves1, João Sérgio Neves1, Sofia Castro Oliveira1,
César Esteves1, Oksana Sokhatsha2, Luís Delgado2, José Luís Medina1,3 &
Davide Carvalho1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, São Jo
˜o
Hospital Center; Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto (FMUP),
Porto, Portugal;2Immunology Department, Sa˜o João Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Instituto de Investigação e
Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Given  the  significant  impact  of  thyroid  function  on  body  weight,  energy
metabolism and adipocytes physiology, our aim was to study the impact of
subclinical thyroid dysfunction in plasmatic levels of adipokines and ICAM-1
(intercellular adhesion molecule 1).
Methods
We evaluated 98 patients with autoimmune thyroid disease divided into three
groups: 30 who were euthyroid (TSHZ0.35-4.94 UI/ml), 35 with subclinical
hypothyroidism (hypoSC, TSH O4.94 UI/ml) and 33 with subclinical hyperthyr-
oidism (hiperSC, TSH !0.35 UI/ml). We evaluated BMI, serum concentration of
FT3,  FT4,  TSH,  C-reactive  protein
(CRP),  adiponectin,  resistin,  PAI-1
(plasminogen activator inhibitor-1) and ICAM-1. The statistical analysis was
performed using ANOVA, Student’s t-test and Spearman’s correlations.
Results
We observed no significant differences in age between euthyroid (50G16 years),
hypoSC (46G17 years) and hiperSC (44G13 years) groups, or gender (90.0%,
97.1% and 90.9% of the female gender respectively). The plasmatic levels of CRP
were higher in individuals with hypoSC in comparison to individuals who were
euthyroid
(0.56G0.55
vs
0.30G0.24,  P!0.001).  The  resistin  levels  were
significantly higher in the hypoSC group compared with the euthyroid group
(20.7G22.6 vs 19.3G9.0, P!0.01) and the hiperSC (20.7G22.6 vs 12.7G
10.9 ng/ml, P!0.01). We observed higher levels of PAI-1 in the hypoSC group
when compared with the euthyroid group (27.3G25.1 vs 18.7G11.8 ng/ml,
P!0.01) and the hiperSC group (27.3G25.1 vs 19.9G17.4 ng/ml, P!0.01). The
patients with hypoSC had lower levels of adiponectin in comparison to patients
with hiperSC (21.0G13.3 vs 28.3G14.7 ng/ml, P!0.01). The PAI-1 levels were
negatively correlated with FT3 levels in the hypoSC group (rZK0.42, P!0.05)
and in the hiperSC group (rZK0.36, P!0.05). The levels of adiponectin had a
significant correlation with the FT3 levels in the hiperSC group (rZK0.35,
P!0.05) and with TSH in the euthyroid group (rZ0.61, P!0.001). ICAM-1
levels  were  positively  correlated  with  resistin  in  hypoSC  group
(rZ0.38,
PZ0.03).
Conclusions
In this study, we found significantly higher levels of resistin and PAI-1 in
subclinical  hypothyroidism.  The  interrelations  between  thyroid  function,
adipokines and ICAM-1 may contribute to the metabolic and cardiovascular
complications in autoimmune thyroid disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP197
GP198
Differences in gene-gene interactions in Graves’ disease patients
stratified by the age of diagnosis
Beata Jurecka-Lubieniecka1, Tomasz Bednarczuk2, Rafal Ploski3,
Dorota Kula1, Andrzej Tukiendorf4, Zofia Kolosza4 & Barbara Jarzab1
1Department of Nuclear Medicine and Endocrine Oncology, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Poland, Gliwice, Poland;2Department of Internal Medicine
and Endocrinology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland;
3Department of Medical Genetics, Forensic Medicine, Medical University
of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland;4Department of Epidemiology, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland.
Background
The  genetic  predisposition  of  Graves’  disease
(GD)  was  proved  by  the
identification of genes with substantial, non-interactive effects on the disease
process. It is known, however, that genetic interactions significantly increase the
likelihood of immune-tolerance-related complex diseases like allergic asthma and
rheumatoid arthritis. In the present study we analyzed the effects of interactions of
multiple loci on the genetic predisposition to GD patients.
Material and methods
A total of 709 patients with GD and 1216 healthy control persons were included
in the study. The patients were stratified according to age at the time of the GD
onset. Further, association analyses were performed for genes with a known
influence on the development of GD - HLADRB1, PTPN22, CTLA4 and TSHR.
The interactions among polymorphisms were analyzed using the multiple logistic
regression and multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) methods.
Results
GD patients stratified by the age of onset differed in allele frequencies of the
HLADRB1*03  and  1858T  polymorphisms  of  the  PTPN22  gene  (ORZ1.7,
PZ0.003; ORZ1.49, PZ0.01 respectively).
We tested the genetic interactions of four SNPs in a pairwise fashion with regard
to  the  disease  risk.  The  interactions  between  the  HLADRB1/PTPN22
and
HLADRB1/CTLA4 genes in young patients were found by the usage of multiple
logistic regression. The coexistence of HLADRB1 with CTLA4 and HLADRB1
with PTPN22 showed interactions on more than additive levels (ORZ3.64,
PZ0.002; ORZ4.20, P!0.001 respectively),  suggesting  that interactions
between these pairs of genes contribute to the development of GD. The MDR
analysis confirmed these interactions.
Conclusion
In contrast with a single gene effect, we observed that interactions between the
HLADRB1/PTPN22 and HLADRB1/CTLA4 genes provided a better match for
determining the risk of young patients for GD onset.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP198
Thyroid-Translational & Clinical
GP199
Does maternal thyroid autoimmunity predict adverse pregnancy
outcomes?
Julia Sastre-Marcos, Florentino Val-Zaballos, Miguel Angel Ruiz-Gines,
Monica Olivar-Azuara, Mercedes Agudo-Macazaga, Roser Fontelles-
Alcover, Dolores Maldonado & Jose Lopez-Lopez
Complejo Hospitalario, Toledo, Spain.
Background
Previous studies of association between maternal thyroid autoimmunity and
adverse pregnancy outcomes have produced inconsistent results.
Objective
To examine whether thyroid autoimmunity detected at first trimester screening is
predictive of a range of adverse obstetric and fetal outcomes.
Patients and methods
We studied 438 women with singleton pregnancies who underwent first trimester
screening test between June and July
2014.  Women were elegible if fetal
gestational  age  was
10-14
weeks  from  ultrasound  crown-rump  length
measurement.  We  evaluated  the  association  between  thyroid  autoimmunity
(positive TPO and/or Tiroglobulin (TG) antibodies] with thyroid function (TSH,
free  T4),  adverse  obstetric  outcomes
(pregnancy  loss  after
20  weeks,  pre-
eclampsia, cesarean section, preterm birth) and adverse neonatal outcomes (birth
weight, small size for gestational age
(SGA), metabolic complications and
neonatal death).
Results
33 women (7.5%) were excluded because of previous thyroid disease. 72 women
showed  thyroid  autoimmunity
(TPO-TG-positive  group,
17.8%).  TSH  was
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
significantly  higher  in  TPO-TG-positive  group
(median
(lower  and  upper
cuartiles) 1.87 (1.27-2.45) vs 1.41 (0.93-1.94) mcU/ml, P!0.01). TSH exceed
the 97.5 percentile for our specific late-first trimester limit (3.62 mcU/ml) in
12.5% of TPO-TG-positive group and in 2.1% in women with negative thyroid
autoimmunity (P!0.01). In 8.6% of the TPO-TG-positive women, thyroxine
treatment was initiated at the end of the first trimester (vs 1.1% in the negative
group P!0.01). Adverse pregnancy outcomes occurred in 61 women (17.1%),
there were not differences between TPO-TG-positive and negative group. There
were no differences in cesarean section neither prematurity. Maternal thyroid
autoimmunity did not predict SGA, metabolic complications or neonatal death.
Conclusions
Thyroid autoimmunity provides higher risk for mild abnormalities in thyroid
function but does not predict adverse pregnancy outcomes in our cohort.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP199
GP200
Betatrophin level in Hashimoto thyreoiditis
Anna Poplawska-Kita1, Katarzyna Siewko1, Maria Kosciuszko-
Zdrodowska1, Danuta Lipinska1, Robert Milewski2, Lukasz Poplawski1,
Malgorzata Szelachowska1 & Maria Gorska1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine,
Medical University, Bialystok, Poland;2Department of Statistics and
Medical Informatics, Medical University, Bialystok, Poland.
Aim
Clinical studies in Hashimoto thyroditis (HT) confirm, that even a minor thyroid
dysfunction is related to significant changes in body mass. Betatrophin, also
known as TD26/RIFL/lipasin/ANGPTL8/C19orf80, is a novel protein predomi-
nantly expressed in human liver and adipose tissue. Stimulators of betatrophin,
such  as  thyroid  hormones  are  usually  relevant  to  energy  expenditure  or
thermogenesis. The mechanisms of action of betatrophin are still unknown. In
the present study we aimed to find out the relation between HT, obesity and
betatrophin level.
Material and methods
The group studied consisted of 133 patients with HT in euthyreosis and 42 healthy
individuals. All the patients underwent body mass analysis with the use of a
medical analyzer INBODY 220. Serum concentrations of TSH and anti-TSH
receptor antibodies (TRAb) were measured using RIA and IgG4, anti-peroxidase
antibodies (TPOAb), TNFa, TGF-b1, betatrophin and leptin were measured by
commercial ELISA.
Results
The patients with HT had higher level of betatrophin (PZ0.008) and TNFa
(PZ0.01) than had the controls. Observed betatrophin levels are positively
correlated with age (PZ0.001; PZ0.03), body mass (PZ0.001; PZ0.03), body
mass index (BMI) (PZ0.000; PZ0.000), Waist-Hip Ratio (WHR) (PZ0.01;
PZ0.001) and fat mass (PZ0.000; PZ0.001) in HT and controls, respectively.
In  the  HT  group  betatrophin  levels  correlated  significantly  with  TPOAb
(PZ0.005; RZ0.39). The patients with elevated IgG4 had significantly lower
level of TPOAb (PZ0.001), betatrophin (PZ0.01), BMI (PZ0.02), fat mass
(PZ0.04) and WHR (PZ0.001) than the non-IgG4-HT individuals.
Conclusions
Significantly higher betatrophin level in the patients with HT, especially with high
level of TPOAb, even in euthyreosis may be cause the increase in fat mass.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP200
GP201
The importance of maternal thyroid for the placental function
Mirjana Barjaktarovic, Tim I M Korevaar, Vincent W V Jaddoe, Yolanda
B de Rijke, Theo J Visser, Eric P Steegers & Robin P Peeters
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Introduction
Maternal thyroid hormone during early pregnancy is important for proper fetal
growth and development. Thyroid hormone receptors are widely expressed in
placental tissue. Interestingly, thyroid dysfunction and suboptimal placental
function have both been associated with pregnancy complications including
preeclampsia, premature delivery and fetal growth restriction. First, we studied
the association of the maternal thyroid and placental function and second, we
investigated  whether  the  placental  function  changes  have  an  effect  in  the
association of the maternal thyroid with pregnancy complications.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
Maternal thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH)/free thyroxine
(FT4) at intake
(median 13.2 weeks, 95% range 9.6-17.6 weeks) were measured in 3556 pregnant
women from the Generation R cohort. Placental function in the 2nd and 3rd
trimester  was  estimated  by  vascular  resistance  measurement  with  Doppler
ultrasound. For that purpose umbilical artery pulsatility index (UMPI) and uterine
artery  resistance  index
(UTRI)  were  calculated.  As  the  placental  vascular
resistance normally drops during gestation, we examined the change in values
between the two times points which was defined as delta UMPI and delta UTRI.
A mediation analysis was performed in order to investigate whether the placental
function has a role in the association of thyroid with preeclampsia, premature
delivery and fetal growth restriction.
Results
There was a negative linear association of TSH and FT4 with the delta UMPI
(PZ0.03; PZ0.005 respectively). There was a positive linear association of FT4
with the delta UTRI (PZ0.03) whereas there was no association for TSH.
Placental function showed a partial mediating role with second trimester UTRI in
the associations of maternal thyroid with preeclampsia and birth weight (PZ0.04;
PZ0.001 respectively).
Conclusion
Maternal thyroid hormones are associated with placental function. Low FT4
levels were associated with differential changes in the physiological decrease in
placental vascular resistance: a large decrease in the umbilical compartment but a
smaller decrease in the uterine compartment. 2nd trimester UTRI showed a
limited mediating role of placental function in the association of maternal thyroid
with the adverse outcomes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP201
GP202
Does mitotane influence free thyroid hormones levels? A possible
explanation in vivo and in vitro
Benoit Blanchet1, Marie Clemence Leguy1, Aude Le Monnier1,2,
Halim Habbas1, Marie Claude Menet1,2, Lionel Groussin1,3 &
Jean Guibourdenche1,2
1CHU Cochin AP-HP, Paris, France;2Physiologie Faculté de Pharmacie,
Paris, France;3Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
Mitotane (o.p’DDD, Lysodren) is used to treat adrenortical carcinoma and
Cushing syndromes. It is catabolised into o.p’DDA and o.p’DDE. It is lowly
protein-bound but its tropism for lipids is high. It has multiple side effects on the
digestive gut increasing alkaline phosphatases and cholesterol. Patients treated
with mitotane have been described as having decreased FT4 levels without any
signs of hypothyroidism. We wanted to know whether this is due to an analytical
interference in the FT4 assay or a true disruption in the thyroid axis and FT4
metabolism.
We retrospectively investigate the sera of 31 patients (22 adrenortical carcinoma,
nine Cushing syndromes) assaying o.p’DDD and o.p’DDE (liquid chromatog-
raphy); TSH, FT4, FT3, albumin, cholesterol, triglycerides (Cobas Roche); TBG
(AdviaCentaur Siemens); rT3 (RIA, IDS). Statistical analysis was performed
using Staview software (Spearman correlation r, P significant if !0.005).
In vitro, the addition of increasing amounts of o.p’DDD (1-40 mg/l) and o.p’DDE
(0.5-10 mg/l) in serum had no significant influence on FT4, FT3 and TSH serum
assay. In vivo, we confirmed that FT4 were slightly decreased under mitotane
although not significantly (K0.16, PZ0.24) while TSH and FT3 were normal.
o.p’DDD levels were negatively correlated with rT3 levels (K0.36, PZ0.013)
and positively correlated with TBG levels (C0.43, PZ0.0016). FT4 levels were
not influenced by albumin or lipids.
Our results show that o.p’DDD and o.p’DDE has no influence on FT4, FT3, and
TSH assay in serum. The lack of correlation between TSH and FT4 levels is not in
favour of a decreased pituitary production of TSH. Mitotane may increase TBG,
thus decreasing FT4 levels but in a moderate way. The increase in rT3 levels
while FT3 levels are unchanged suggests that mitotane may induce desiodases.
Our results point out that the hepatic actions of mitotane may interfere with
thyroid hormones physiology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP202
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
GP203
Repeating FNA in AUS/FLUS - is it necessary?
Ana Alves Rafael, Ricardo Rodrigues Marques, Sílvia Sofia Silva &
Luís Viana Fernandes
CHLO, EPE - Hospital Egas Moniz - Department Cirurgia II, Lisboa,
Portugal.
Background
The review of the Bethesda System Classification has brought some challenge
to the clinical role of category III lesions. Repeating fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
is time-consuming, painful,  brings additional cost and sometimes  does  not
change the clinical decision. Our aim was to prove if there is true benefit in
repeating FNA.
Methods
Retrospective review of 4549 thyroid FNAs between January 2012 and June
2015, from which 671 classified as AUS/FLUS. SPSS was applied.
Results
14.8% FNAs were initially classified as AUS/FLUS and selected for analysis.
64.8% repeated FNA. AUS/FLUS rate on second FNA was 40%. Mean time
between FNAs was 3.1 months. In 195 cases there was follow-up histology. Time
between  FNAs  was  longer  in  second  FNA  revealing  carcinoma.  Risk  of
malignancy in AUS/FLUS FNAs versus rate of malignancy on operated patients
were as follows: global risk - 8.6 vs 29.7%; after a single AUS/FLUS diagnosis -
11.5 vs 24.1%; with two successive AUS/FLUS diagnosis - 16.7 vs 29.2% and for
patients with a benign cytologic interpretation following the initial AUS/FLUS
diagnosis  K2.6
vs
23.1%.  Rate  of  malignancy  of  lobectomy  vs  total
thyroidectomy was 27 vs 33.8%. Rate of reintervention was 87.1%.
Conclusion
The authors applied the rate of malignancy after a single diagnosis of AUS/FLUS
(11.5%) to all patients who had to repeat FNA (335). The hypothesis of going
directly to surgery instead of second FNA is in the same confidence interval,
arguing against the role of repeating FNA.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP203
GP204
Selenium supplementation and autoantibody titers in Graves’ disease
Antonio Jr Faltado, Marc Gregory Yu & Laura Rosario Acampado
Philippine General Hospital, Manila, The Philippines.
Background
Selenium (Se), a trace mineral with anti-oxidative properties, has been proposed
to be potentially beneficial in patients with Graves’ disease (GD), especially those
with active Graves’ ophthalmopathy (GO).
Methods
Trials evaluating the efficacy of Se among non-pregnant adult GD patients with
active GO, versus either placebo or an alternative drug, and on top of standard
therapy, were included. A literature search was performed by two independent
authors with eligible studies undergoing a validity screen. Data extraction of
selected studies was performed using a data extraction form, with subsequent
statistical analysis using RevMan 5.1 software. Results were presented as mean
differences,  standard  errors,  and
95%  confidence  intervals,  and  graphically
presented as forest plots. Estimates were calculated using the inverse variance
method for continuous variables and pooled using the fixed effects model. I2 and
c2 tests were used to assess heterogeneity.
Results
Fourteen studies were initially retrieved, but only two trials were ultimately
included in the analysis. Both had good methodological quality and totalled 197
GD patients with active, non-severe GO. The only common outcomes of interest
were changes in TRAB and TPOAB titers. We found no statistically significant
difference in both TRAB (95% CI, K1.38 (K3.19, 0.44), PZ0.14) and TPOAB
(95% CI, 36.66 (K32.56, 105.88), PZ0.3) titers on follow-up among patients
given Se as compared to placebo. No significant heterogeneity was observed in
either analysis (TRAB, I2Z36%; TPOAB, I2Z0%). However, our study was
limited by the small number of studies, a small sample size, and lack of other
synthesizable outcomes.
Conclusion
This is the first meta-analysis on the efficacy of Se in GD patients with active,
non-severe GO. We found no statistically significant differences in both TRAB
and TPOAB titers between Se and placebo groups. We recommend larger studies
to further validate these findings.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP204
GP205
One in four patients with adequately treated primary hypothyroidism
continue to be symptomatic and persisting symptoms related to ongoing
thyroid auto-immunity
Jubbin Jacob2, Ivy Sebastain1 & Mary John2
1Department of Medicine, Christian Medical College and Hospital,
Ludhiana, Punjab, India;2Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine,
Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, Punjab, India.
Background
A significant  percentage  of  patients  with  adequately  replaced  primary
hypothyroidism (PH) continue to be symptomatic. Some of these persisting
symptoms maybe attributed to non-restoration of neurocognitive functions and
psychological well-being.
Objectives
To estimate the prevalence of persisting hypothyroid symptoms in patients with
PH on biochemically adequate replacement therapy. To correlate persistent
symptoms with thyroid hormone levels, psychological distress scores and anti-
thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody levels.
Methodology
Consequent adult patients (18-60 years), with PH, on replacement therapy and
having achieved biochemical euthyroidism were enrolled in the study after
informed consent. They were assessed for ongoing symptoms of hypothyroidism
and psychological distress using three validated questionnaires i.e. Thyroid
Symptom  Questionnaire  (TQ18),  General  Health  Questionnaire  (GHQ)  and
Hospital Anxiety and Depression (HAD) inventory. Serum was sampled on the
same day for Free T4, Free T3, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) assessments
and for anti-TPO antibody titers.
Results
One hundred and seventeen patients (F: 102, M: 15, mean age 41years) diagnosed
with PH were recruited. TQ18 scores revealed that 32 (27.3%) patients continued
to be symptomatic despite biochemical euthyroidism. FT3, FT4 and TSH levels
failed to reveal any significant correlation (P-0.18, P-0.96, P-0.54 respectively)
with TQ18 scores whereas TPO antibodies titres were significantly correlated
with TQ18 scores (P-0.008). HAD scores suggested that 27 (23%) patients had
anxiety and 32 (27.3%) patients were depressed. Anti-TPO antibody titers and
FT4 values had significant correlation with anxiety (P-0.008 & P-0.01) while
depression was correlated only with elevated antibody titres only (P-0.02).
Conclusions
One in four patients with adequately replaced PH continue to be symptomatic.
Symptom scores were significantly correlated with higher thyroid antibody titres
but not with thyroid hormone levels. Psychological distress scores were correlated
with lower FT4 levels and with higher antibody titres.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP205
GP206
FRENDe Thyroid Duo: a new way of helping patients with subclinical
thyroid dysfunction
Sunmi Han, Hyejin Lee, Jihyun Seong, Je-Sik Jeong & Changseop Lee
NanoEnTek Inc, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Introduction
Subclinical  thyroid  dysfunction  is  defined  as  an  abnormal  serum  thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) level and free thyroxine (FT4) and triiodothyronin
(T3) levels within their reference ranges. The prevalence of subclinical thyroid
dysfunction has increased, especially in women older than 60 years. There is good
evidence  that  subclinical  hypothyroidism  is  associated  with  progression  to
overt disease, so screening is recommended for high-risk populations. FRENDe
Thyroid Duo,  a  microfluidic  immunoassay,  was  developed  to provide  a
convenient quantitative method for both TSH and FT4 in a single test.
Objective
To evaluate the analytical performance a FRENDe Thyroid Duo immunoassay
on FRENDe system.
Method
The analytical performance studies (sensitivity, precision, linearity, interference
and  accuracy)  were  performed  according  to  the  CLSI  protocols
(EP17,
EP05, EP06, EP07 and EP09). For the method comparison, serum TSH and
free T4 were assayed by FRENDe and Architect i1000 (Abbott Diagnostics,
Abbott Park, IL, USA).
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
The FRENDe Thyroid  Duo demonstrated acceptable  imprecision of %CV
(!10%) in low, intermediate, and high level samples for both analytes. The
linearity of the assay was found to be acceptable in the range of 0.06-25 mIU/l for
TSH and 0.4-6 ng/dl for FT4. Method comparisons between Abbott Architect’s
assays  and  NanoEnTek’s  FREND  Thyroid  Duo  assay  were  made  and  no
significant deviation from linearity was found. No significant interference was
observed for both analytes from bilirubin, Intra-lipid and total protein up to
concentrations of 20 mg/dl, 3 g/dl, and 12 g/dl respectively.
Conclusion
The NanoEnTek’s FRENDe Thyroid Duo assay represents a rapid, accurate and
convenient mean of measuring TSH and FT4 quantities in human serum on
FRENDe system. The subclinical thyroid dysfunction may be screened or
monitored in a clinic or physician’s office using this microfluidic 2-in-1 thyroid
assay with ease and comfort.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP206
GP207
Predictive factors of outcomes in radioiodine treatment for Graves’
disease
Luís Cardoso1, Dírcea Rodrigues1,3, Mónica Silva2, Nuno Vicente1,
Daniela Guelho1,3, Diana Martins1, Diana Oliveira1, Adriana Lages1,
Mara Ventura1, Gracinda Costa2,3, Joa˜o Pedroso Lima2,3 &
Francisco Carrilho1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;2Department of
Nuclear Medicine, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal;3Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
I, RAI) is a safe and effective option for the treatment of Graves’
Radioiodine (131
disease (GD). However, approximately 20% of RAI treated patients will have
persistent disease or will relapse after the first treatment. Our aim was to identify
the factors influencing the outcomes in RAI treatment for GD.
Methods
We analysed 143 DG patients (116 women) treated with RAI between October
2002 and April 2014 and R12 months of follow-up. Patients were assessed before
(thyroid ultrasonography, thyroid scintigraphy, thyroid-stimulating hormone, free
T4, free T3, and thyrotropin receptor antibodies (TRAbs)) RAI, and after 3, 6 and
12 months (thyroid-stimulating hormone, free T4) after RAI. Patients stopped
antithyroid  drugs
7 days  before  RAI.  Successful  treatment was defined  as
euthyroidism or hypothyroidism, 12 months after RAI treatment and no need for
antithyroid drugs or additional RAI treatments.
Results
Therapeutic success was achieved in 80.4% of DG patients. Hypothyroidism
prevalence increased during the study course; 43.2, 72.4, and 87% of patients had
hypothyroidism at 3, 6, and 12 months, respectively. Univariate analysis showed
TRAbs,  functioning  thyroid  mass,  and  administered  activity  of  RAI  were
significantly higher in patients with unsuccessful RAI treatment (48.2 U/l vs
20.0 U/l; 77.8 g vs 48.1 g; 517
vs 398 MBq, respectively). However, multiple
logistic regression analyses demonstrated that only functioning thyroid mass was
inversely associated with RAI success (odds ratio [OR]Z0.89, CIZ0.83-0.96,
PZ0.004), particularly for estimated thyroid masses R60 g (sensitivityZ78%,
specificityZ82%, likelihood ratioZ4.4, P!0.001).
Previous treatment with methimazole, absence of thyroid nodules (R1 cm), and
scintigraphic homogeneous radiotracer uptake were associated with hypothyroid-
ism development. Multivariate logistic regression confirmed previous treatment
with methimazole and higher risk for hypothyroidism development (ORZ10.3,
CIZ0.02-0.56, PZ0.009).
Conclusion
RAI  was  successful  in  most
(80%)  patients.  Higher  thyroid  masses  were
associated with lower success rates. Patients previously treated with methimazole
have higher probability of developing hypothyroidism after RAI treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP207
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP208
Thyroid hormone profile after the single dose of iodine-containing
contrast agent administration during coronary angiography-
prospectice study
Slawomir Rychlik2, Artur Chmiel2, Joanna Wierzbicka-Chmiel2,
Lukasz Otremba2, Wojciech Kreis2, Bogdan Marek1,2 &
Dariusz Kajdaniuk1,2
1Department of Pathophysiology and Endocrinology, School of Medicine.
Medical University of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland;2Provincial Hospital,
Department of Cardiology and Endocrinology, Rybnik, Poland.
Introduction
Previous studies suggest close relationship between thyroid morphology and the
danger of thyroid hormones (THs) disturbances after high single dose of iodine-
containing contrast agent. The aim of the study was to assess the prognostic risk
factors which influence on THs after the cardiac catheterization at patient with
coronary artery disease (CAD).
Methods
One hundred twenty patient (F/MZ40/80, 59G11 years old) without recognized
previous thyroid dysfunction and CAD were enrolled between March and October
2015 into the study group I (NZ70) with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) and II
group (NZ50) with stable angina pectoris, matching to the age. Thyroid function
serum parameters (TSH, fT3, fT4), serum concentration of thyroid antibodies
(TPO-Ab, Tg-Ab) and thyroid ultrasound were performed before conventional
angiography.  Hormone  status  was  also  evaluated
48 h  and
50
days  after
catheterization.
Results
At the admission, the subclinical hypothyroidism was recognize at five (4%)
patients, low T3 syndrome in two percents, thyroid antibodies at 8% and thyroid
gland  nodules  at
44
(37%)  participants.  Two  days  after  angiography  the
significant decrease of fT3  occurred (mean differences K0.32 pg/ml, P!0.01)
and it was more significant in the group II (time!group interaction P!0.01).
After adjusting for thyroid morphology and thyroid antibodies the differences
between groups was still significant (PZ0.04), but not after adjusting for the peak
value  of  hs  troponin  T  and  hs  CRP
(PZ0.23).  The  concentration  of fT3
normalized after 50 days in the whole group.
The TSH serum concentration was stable after 2 and 50 days after catheterization.
Conclusion
The iodine-containing contrast agent administration during coronary angiography
is safe in the aspect of the thyroid function. It was not thyroid morphology but the
presence of ACS which influenced THs levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP208
Thyroid - Translational & Clinical
GP209
Higher thyrotropin can be used as an additional risk factor in
prediction of malignancy in euthyroid thyroid nodules evaluated by
cytology based on Bethesda system
Husniye Baser1, Oya Topaloglu2, Abbas Ali Tam2, Berna Evranos1,
Afra Alkan3, Nuran Sungu4, Ersin Gurkan Dumlu5, Reyhan Ersoy2 &
Bekir Cakir2
1Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;
3Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Biostatistics, Ankara, Turkey;4Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey;5Yildirim Beyazit
University Faculty of Medicine, Department of General Surgery, Ankara,
Turkey.
Introduction
Recently, it has been suggested that thyrotropin (TSH) concentration can be used
as a marker for prediction of thyroid malignancy. However, the association
between the cytology results and TSH levels is not clear. In this study, we aimed
to investigate the relationship between TSH levels and Bethesda categories and
determine the role of TSH levels in prediction of malignancy in patients with
different Bethesda categories.
Methods
The data of 1433 euthyroid patients with 3206 thyroid nodules who underwent
thyroidectomy were screened retrospectively. The preoperative cytology results,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
thyroid function tests, thyroid autoantibodies and presence of histopathological
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) were recorded.
Results
Of the 1433 patients, 585 (40.8%) had malignant and 848 (59.2%) had benign
histopathology. Malignant group had smaller nodule size, elevated TSH levels,
a higher rate of presence of HT compared to benign group (P!0.001, all).
Cytology results of 3206 nodules were as follows; 832 nondiagnostic (ND), 1666
benign, 392 atypia of undetermined significance/follicular lesion of undetermined
significance
(AUS/FLUS),
68
follicular  neoplasm/suspicious  for  follicular
neoplasm (FN/SFN), 133 suspicious for malignancy (SM), and 115 malignant.
Both SM and malignant cytology groups had significantly higher TSH levels than
other
4
Bethesda  categories
(P!0.05,  all).  Benign  cytology  group  had
significantly lower TSH levels compared to other cytology groups (P!0.05,
all). TSH was significantly lower in ND cytology group compared to AUS/FLUS,
SM, and malignant cytology groups (P!0.001, all). Patients with malignant final
histopathology in ND and AUS/FLUS cytology groups had significantly higher
TSH levels compared to patients with benign final histopathology (P!0.05, all).
As Bethesda category proceeded towards cytologies with higher estimated risk of
malignancy, TSH levels tended to increase gradually.
Conclusion
In addition to cytology, TSH levels can be used as a supplementary marker in
prediction of malignancy in certain Bethesda categories.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP209
GP210
The expression of co-stimulatory receptor SLAMF-1 in lymphocytes
from patients with autoimmune thyroiditis
Miguel Sampedro-Nún˜ ez1, Marlen Vitales-Noyola2, Ana Serrano-
Somavilla1, Carmelina Di Pasquale3, Rebeca Hernández-Martínez1,
Ana Ramos-Levi1, Roberto González-Amaro2 & Mónica Marazuela1
1Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa,
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain;2Department of Immunology, School of Medicine,
UASLP, San Luis Potosí, Mexico;3Section of Endocrinology & Internal
Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara,
Ferrara, Italy.
Introduction
Signalling lymphocytic activation molecule SLAMF1 (CD150) is a modulatory
receptor expressed in most immune cells. Different data indicate that CD150 is
involved in T cell cytokine production, NK cell and CD8 T cell mediated
cytotoxicity, and T regulatory (Treg) cell activity. Patients with autoimmune
thyroid disease (AITD) show defects in their immune-regulatory mechanisms.
Herein  we  assessed  the  expression  and  function  CD150
in  lymphocytes
subpopulations from patients with AITD.
Patients and methods
Peripheral  blood  samples from
17 patients with  Graves’  disease
(GD),  11
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT), and 21 healthy subjects were studied. Thyroid
tissue samples were also analysed in five patients and expression of CD150 was
assessed  by  flow  cytometry  and  immunohistochemistry.  In  addition,  the
functional  role  of  CD150
in  CD4CCD25CTreg  cells  was  assessed  by  a
carboxyfluorescein proliferative assay.
Results
An increased expression of SLAMF1 by peripheral blood CD4CT cells and Th17
cells was found in AITD patients compared to controls. In contrast, a decreased
expression of SLAMF1 was observed in Treg cells from these patients. The
SLAMF1 expression was diminished in thyroid mononuclear cells from AITD
patients in comparison with peripheral blood CD4CT cells. Finally, in vitro
functional assays showed that exogenous SLAMF1 agonist increased activity in
Treg cells from healthy controls but not in AITD patients.
Conclusion
The altered pattern of expression and the functional alteration of SLAMF1 found
in  patients  with  AITD  suggests  that  SLAMF1
could  be  involved  in  the
pathogenesis of AITD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP210
GP211
Long-term outcome in levothyroxine treated individuals with
Subclinical Hypothyroidism and concomitant Heart Disease
Mette Nygaard Andersen1, Anne-Marie Schjerning Olsen1, Jesper
Clausager Madsen2, Søren Lund Kristensen1, Jens Faber3,4,
Christian Torp-Pedersen5, Gunnar Hilmar Gislason1,6 & Christian Selmer7
1Department of Cardiology, Gentofte University Hospital, Hellerup,
Denmark;2Elective Laboratory of the Capitol Region, Copenhagen,
Denmark;3Department of Endocrinology, Herlev University Hospital,
Herlev, Denmark;4Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark;5Department of Health Science and Technology,
University of Aalborg, Aalborg, Denmark;6The Danish heart foundation,
Copenhagen, Denmark;7Department of Endocrinology, Amager and
Hvidovre Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction
Subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) is a common condition and can lead to
impaired systolic and diastolic cardiac function. However, controversy remains
over the potential benefits of levothyroxine substitution in patients with SCH and
concomitant heart disease. We aimed to examine the effects of levothyroxine
treatment on all-cause mortality in patients diagnosed with SCH and heart
disease.
Methods
Primary care patients aged 18 years and older with established heart disease
(ischemic heart disease, heart failure or cardiac arrhythmia) that underwent
thyroid function tests in
2000-2009 were enrolled upon diagnosis of SCH.
Exclusion criteria included a history of thyroid dysfunction, thyroid-related
medication or medication affecting thyroid function. Patients were stratified
according to cashed prescriptions of levothyroxine in a run-in period of 6 months.
Risk of all-cause mortality was estimated as incidence rate ratio (IRR) by use of
time-dependent  Poisson  regression  models  adjusted  for  age,  gender  and
comorbidity, with patients not receiving levothyroxine as reference.
Results
The total study cohort comprised 814 patients with concomitant SCH and heart
disease (mean age 74.1 (S.D.G13.5) years, 65% female). Within the run-in period
of the first 6 months 44 (5.4%) patients were prescribed levothyroxine. During a
median follow-up time of 5.1 years (IQR 8.7-2.8), 442 (54.3%) patients died.
Incidence rates for all-cause mortality were 9.7 and 8.0 per 100 person-years
among  untreated  and  levothyroxine-treated  patients,  respectively.  No  signi-
ficantly increased risk of all-cause mortality was found in patients substituted with
levothyroxine (adjusted IRR 1.06 (95% CI: 0.69-1.65)).
Conclusion
Levothyroxine  substitution  in  patients  with  subclinical  hypothyroidism  and
concomitant heart disease is not associated with a significant change in the risk of
all-cause mortality in a real-world cohort study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP211
GP212
Acute icteric hepatitis as a presentation of Graves’ thyrotoxicosis
Amudha Doraiswamy1, Adelyn Henry1 & Nor Azmi Kamaruddin2
1Hospital Melaka, Melaka, Malaysia;2National University Malaysia
Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Introduction
Graves’ thyrotoxicosis has been known to affect other organ systems in the body
including the liver. However, severe hepatitis in this clinical context is quite rare.
Case report
We report a 55-year-old man who presented with marked weight loss and
jaundice. In addition, he had a diffuse goitre with fine tremors in the hands.
Laboratory work-up revealed thyrotoxicosis with FT4 of 87.9 pmol/l and TSH of
!0.01 mIU/l. He had abnormal liver function with total bilirubin 258.3 mmol/l,
Direct Bilirubin 217 mmol/l, indirect bilirubin 41.2 mmol/l, ALP 306 U/l and ALT
at 54 U/l. Serological tests excluded viral hepatitis. Ultrasound of the thyroid and
hepatobiliary system together with MRCP were normal. In view of the hepatitis,
he was given a potassium iodide solution and dexamethasone (10 mg daily) to
prevent the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. The jaundice and liver function test
improved within a few days. Carbimazole 20 mg daily was slowly commenced
with the resulting drop of FT4  to 25 pmol/l. However the ALP increased to
359 mmo/l requiring the reduction of carbimazole dose down to 10 mg daily.
Subsequent FT4 came down to 15 pmol/l and he successfully underwent an RAI
therapy 2 months later, which was uneventful.
Discussion
Acute icteric hepatitis occurs in
!1% of Graves’ thyrotoxicosis, posing a
management dilemma. This has to do with the close association between liver
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
enzyme abnormalities and oral antithyroid medications. Propylthiouracil and
carbimazole, may cause elevation in aminotransferase levels
(28%)  usually
6
weeks  to
2
months  after  administration.  In  our  patient  the  elevated
aminotransferase level preceded the administration of the drug which lead to
rapid aggravation of the hepatocyte damage.
In  conclusion,  derangement  of  liver  enzymes  associated  with  Graves’
thyrotoxicosis even in fulminant cases tends to be transient and most patients
recover with no long-term sequeale.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP212
GP213
Autoimmune thyroid disease related to Helicobacter pylori
contamination
Iryna Voloshyna, Vitaliy Krivenko, Mykola Voloshyn, Vladimir Deynega &
Vladislav Ponomarenko
Zaporozhye State Medical University, Zaporozhye, Ukraine.
Introduction
Strong association between pathogenesis of autoimmunity and bacterial infection
particularly  Helicobacter  pylori
(H.pylori)  had  been  observed  in  numerous
studies. Nevertheless the possible role of H.pylori in progression of autoimmune
thyroid disease is still discussed.
The aim of the study was to reveal the relation between Hashimoto thyroiditis
(HT) and presence of H.pylori as well as to analyze the impact of eradication
therapy on level of the autoantibodies against thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO).
Methods
One  hundred  forty  six  patients
(112
females,
34
males)  with  HT  were
prospectively included in this study. Control group consist of 90 volunteers
without history of thyroid disease. Urea breath test had been used to detect
H.pylori in all subjects. In H.pylori-positive patients the 14 days eradication
therapy - clarithromycin 500 mg, pantoprazole 40 mg, amoxicillin 1 g twice a
day had been prescribed. The anti-TPO level had been measured using ELISA kits
on baseline, 15th and 30th days. The results were analysed using two-sided
Fisher’s exact test and the respective odds ratio (OR) was calculated.
Results
The rate of H.pylori evaluation was 70% in HT patients compared with 53% in
control  group
(ORZ2.02,
95%  CI  1.2-3.3;  PZ0.01).  The  successful
HP-eradication rate was 86%. We revealed significant reduction of anti-TPO
up to 62% (P! 0.001) on 30th day in successfully treated patients. Notable
reduction in the severity of tissue inflammation on ultrasound pictures had been
observed under H.pylori-eradication therapy.
Conclusion
The  sustained  relationship  between  Hashimoto  thyroiditis  and  presence  of
H.pylori had been revealed. Encouraging data of HP-eradication influence on
anti-TPO  level  suggests  the  need  for  further  observations  and  possible
optimization of autoimmune thyroiditis diagnostic and treatment protocol.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP213
GP214
Evaluation of quality of life in euthyroid patients with high
autoantibody titers
Funda Kurt1 & Aysegul Atmaca2
1Ondokuz Mayis University School of Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Samsun, Turkey;2Ondokuz Mayis University School of
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Samsun, Turkey.
Introduction
Thyroid dysfunction affects quality of life (QoL) in untreated patients. However,
patients with high thyroid autoantibodies complain about symptoms that resemble
thyroid dysfunction even if they are euthyroid. The aim of this study was to
evaluate QoL in euthyroid patients with elevated thyroid autoantibodies.
Methods
Patients  who  admitted  to  Endocrinology  clinic  with  symptoms  of  thyroid
dysfunction and no other disease were included in the study. Thyroid function
tests and thyroid autoantibodies (anti-thyroglobulin and anti-thyroid peroxidase)
were studied. Patients with normal thyroid functions but high autoantibody titers
(nZ100) were included as the patient group. Healthy individuals with normal
thyroid functions and normal autoantibody (nZ100) titers were included as the
control group. Short Form-36 (SF-36) questionnaire was used to assess and
compare QoL between the groups. Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
were used to determine whether the effect of thyroid autoantibody positivity on
patients’ QoL is affected by the presence of depression and anxiety.
Results
Physical  functioning
(PZ0.004),  role  physical
(!0.001),  role  emotional
(!0.001),  social  functioning
(0.017),  mental  health
(!0.001),  vitality
(!0.001), physical (!0.001) and mental (!0.001) component scores were
significantly lower in patients compared to controls. Beck Depression (P!0.001)
and Anxiety (P!0.001) Inventory scores were significantly higher in the patient
group. Only bodily pain and general health were similar between the groups. In
the patient group, all SF-36 domains were negatively correlated with both Beck
Depression and Beck Anxiety scores.
Conclusion
This study revealed that QoL in euthyroid patients with high autoantibody titers
was lower compared to healthy controls, and also negatively affected with
depression and anxiety. Both physical and mental components of QoL are
affected.  Thyroid  autoantibodies  may  therefore  affect  QoL  and  well-being
independent of thyroid function tests.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP214
GP215
Assessing thyroid function and immunogenicity in patients undergoing
chronic treatment with methadone
Sava Petrov1, Maria Orbetzova1, Yanko Iliev1, Tanya Deneva1 &
Doychin Boyadjiev2
1Medical University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria;2University of Plovdiv,
Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
Introduction
The aim of the study was to assess the function and immunogenicity of thyroid
gland  of  patients  undergoing  chronic  treatment  with  the  opiate  agonist
Methadone.
Material and methods
Cross-sectional, observational study included patients from 18 to 40 years of age
undergoing chronic treatment with Methadone for at least 6 months. A total of 176
participants took part in the study. 140 patients were from five clinical programs in
Bulgaria and 36 clinically healthy people from the same age and without a history of
thyroid disorder were selected as a control group. Patients’ group was subdivided
into different groups by dose of methadone, time of exposition and duration of heroin
abuse before starting the methadone treatment by using the 25, 50, and 75 percentile
of each value. We investigated thyroid function by measuring levels of fT3, fT4 and
TSH in the serum of our participants. Also immunogenicity of thyroid gland was
investigated by assessing levels of anti-Tpo-antibody and anti-Tg- antibody.
Results
Mean daily dose of Methadone was 98.9/G41/mg. Mean duration of treatment was
33.91/G24.57/months and the mean duration of heroin abuse prior starting the
treatment with Methadone was 6.61/G4/years. The patients’ and the control group
were identical by the factors sex, age and BMI. We found statistically significant
higher levels of free  T4
in the  patients’  group. Also statistically  significant
differences were found in some of the groups compared with controls when
analyzing factors duration of treatment with Methadone, daily dose and duration of
heroin abuse. There were no statistically significant differences regarding levels of
free T3 and TSH. We did not found differences in immunogenicity between the
groups.
Conclusions
Chronic Methadone treatment is associated with isolated higher levels of fT4
without changing levels of TSH, fT3 or immunogenicity of thyroid gland.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP215
GP216
Endocrine toxicities of immune checkpoint inhibitors: a single centre
experience
Elisa González-Rodríguez1 & Delvys Rodríguez-Abreu2
1Hospital Universitario Doctor Negrin de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas, Spain;
2Hospital Universitario Insular de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas, Spain.
Introduction
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) are a new drug generation used for advanced
neoplasias. They are monoclonal antibodies which enhance the immune system to
combat cancer cells. As a result, immunologic tolerance can be altered and
autoimmunity triggered. Toxicities associated to ICIs have been named immune-
related adverse events (irAE). ‘Time to resolution’ of endocrine irAEs have not
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
been well described as this term has not been defined in clinical trials. The aim of
this study was to describe the frequency and characteristics of endocrine irAEs in
the patients treated with ICIs at our centre.
Methods
Between 2010 and 2015, 91 patients have been treated with anti CTLA-4, PD1
and PD-L1mAbs for advanced neoplasias (melanoma, lung cancer and Hodgkin’s
Lymphoma). This report is based on the retrospective review of the records of 81
patients considered suitable for inclusion. For thyroidopathies, we defined “time
to resolution” as the time it took to normalize TSH levels.
RESULTS
Seven patients (8.6%) presented endocrine irAEs. Five patients (6.2%) developed
painless thyroiditis, 1 (1.2%) Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and 1 (1.2%) hypophisitis.
Endocrinopathies presented after a median of 9 weeks (2-11) once treatment
started, and the patients received a median number of doses of 4.5. Thyroiditis
where all secondary to antiPD1mAbs. All patients presented with the classic
triphasic presentation with a median of 7 weeks of hyperfunction and a mean time
to  resolution  of
20
weeks.  Three  of  five  patients  developed  permanent
hypothyroidism. The patient with hypophysitis presented with asthenia, intense
headache  and  blurred  vision
11
weeks  after  starting  treatment  with  an
antiCTLA4mAb. Corticotroph and thyrotroph axes where affected and have not
recovered 6 months after the event. Five more patients (6.2%) showed a transitory
decrease in TSH with normal T4 and T3 levels which could correspond to Sick
Euthyroid Syndromes or short, subclinical thyroiditis.
Conclusions
Endocrinopathies due to the use of ICIs are common and generally mild. In our
series, thyroiditis was the most frequent irAE. Clinical presentation and duration
of ICIs-induced thyroiditis is similar to sporadic cases, although there could
possibly a higher tendency to develop permanent hypothyroidism. Hypophisitis is
an unfrequent but serious irAE. Endocrinologists must be aware of this emerging
cause of autoimmune endocrinopathies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP216
GP217
Evaluation of the interrelations between thyroid function, insulin
resistance, lipid profile, C-reactive protein and homocysteine in patients
with autoimmune thyroiditis
Celestino Neves1, João Sérgio Neves1, Sofia Castro Oliveira1,
César Esteves1, Oksana Sokhatska2, Camila Dias3, Luís Delgado2,
José Luís Medina1 & Davide Carvalho1,4
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, São Jo
˜o
Hospital Center; Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto (FMUP),
Porto, Portugal;2Immunology Department, Sa˜o João Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine of University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Department of Health
Information and Decision Sciences, São João Hospital, Faculty of Medicine
of University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;4Instituto de Investiga
¸ão e Inova
¸
˜o
em Saúde, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
In patients with autoimmune thyroiditis, thyroid function appears to be related to
increased cardiovascular risk. It was our objective to evaluate the relationship
between TSH, insulin resistance, lipid profile, C-reactive protein (CRP) and
homocysteine in patients with autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT).
Methods
We analyzed the lipid profile, the CRP, anti-thyroid antibodies, homocysteine,
folic acid, vitamin B12 levels and the insulin resistance indexes such as HOMA-
IR, QUICKI (Quantitative Insulin Sensitivity Check Index), HISI (Hepatic Insulin
Sensitivity Index), WBISI (Whole-Body ISI) and IGI (Insulinogenic Index), in
171 patients with AIT and TSH !2.00 mUI/ml and in 71 patients with AIT and
TSH O2.00 mUI/ml. All patients had normal levels of FT3 and FT4. The statistical
analysis was done with the Student’s t-test and Pearson correlation. The results
are in meanGDP. We considered a two-tailed P-value of !0.05 significant.
Results
We found significantly higher levels of insulin at 120 min of OGTT in the patients
with TSH O2.00 mUI/ml (65.9G57.8 vs 84.1G65.4 mUI/ml; PZ0.02). The
levels of homocysteine were also significantly higher in the group with TSH
O2.00 mUI/ml (10.8G12.6 vs 8.3G3.3 mmol/l; PZ0.04). We found the IGI
(0.036G0.378 vs 0.252G0.310; PZ0.02) and WBISI (6.323G7.335 vs 6.112G
4.019; PZ0.003) indexes to be significantly higher in the TSH O2.00 mUI/ml
group. In the group with TSH !2.00 mUI/ml there were positive correlations
between IGI and the triglyceride levels (rZ0.256; PZ0.004) and the anti-TPO
levels (rZ0.137; PZ0.03). In the same group we found negative correlations
between  WBISI  and  CRP  (rZK0.199;  PZ0.02)  and  positive  correlations
between  WBISI  and  TSH
(rZ0.44;  PZ0.01).  In  the  group  with  TSH
O2.00 mUI/ml we found positive correlations between the FT4  levels and the
BMI (rZ0.413; P!0.001). In the same group the levels of LDL were positively
correlated with TSH (rZ0.245; PZ0.04), and negatively with FT3 (rZK0.265;
PZ0.02). There was also a positive correlation between the Lp(a) and FT4 levels
(rZ0.259; PZ0.04).
Conclusion
In patients with AIT, the relationship between thyroid function, lipid profile,
homocysteine and the insulin resistance indexes, may contribute to an increased
cardiovascular risk.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP217
GP218
Relationship between immunoexpression of IL17A, CD68 positivity and
lymphocyte infiltration degree in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis patients
Ilze Konrade1, Tatjana Zake1, Sandra Skuja2, Ieva Kalere1 &
Valerie Groma2
1Riga Stradins University, Department of Internal Medicine, Riga, Latvia;
2Riga Stradins University, Institute of Anatomy and Anthropology, Riga,
Latvia.
Introduction
Th17 cells and their hallmark cytokine IL-17A were reported to be involved in the
development of autoimmune orchitis and encephalomyelitis by impairing the
integrity of the blood-testis and blood-brain barrier integrity and by inducing
local inflammation. However, the role of IL17A in autoimmune thyroid disease is
still debatable.
The aim of our study was to estimate immunoexpression of IL-17A in the thyroid
tissue of patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) and Graves’ disease (GD)
compared to control group.
Materials and methods
35 adult patients presenting 18 cases of HT, seven of GD, and ten cases of
ordinary colloidal goiter without autoimmune component undergoing thyroid-
ectomy were enrolled in this study. Immunostaining was performed using an anti-
IL17A antibody; macrophages were visualized by CD68 immunohistochemistry.
Results were expressed in a semiquantitative manner.
Results
The highest expression level of IL17A in the follicular epithelial cells was
observed in HT patients, furthermore, in HT and GD patients it was significantly
higher than that in control group (P!0.001; PZ0.007, respectively). CD68-
positive macrophages of both intra- and extrafollicular localization were observed
in all tissue samples. The largest number of CD68-positive cells within follicular
lumen was found in HT patients (PZ0.001). CD68 positivity observed in GD
patients was higher compared to nodular goiter, but the difference was not
significant
(PZ0.064). A strong positive correlation was found between the
degree  of  inflammatory  cell  infiltration  and  the  number  of  CD68-positive
macrophages in HT patients (rZ0.912, PZ0.0001). In addition, HT patients
demonstrated  a  moderate  positive  correlation  between  CD68
and  IL17A
immunopositivity (rZ0.631, PZ0.005).
Conclusion
Overexpression of IL17A in the follicular epithelial cells associated with the
presence of intrafollicular macrophages and high inflammatory infiltration degree
in HT patients may indicate the involvement of IL17 in thyroid follicular barrier
impairment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP218
Thyroid Cancer
GP219
Prognostic factors for tumor invasiveness in papillary thyroid
microcarcinomas
Antonios Polymeris1, Maria Mizamtsidi2, Alexis Travlos1,
Georgios Katsoulis1, Fotini Dimitropoulou2, Alexandros Dermentzoglou2,
Nikolaos Kalogeris2, Constantinos Tzioras2 & Andromachi Vryonidou2
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Alexandra
Hospital, Athens, Greece;2Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, Korgialenio-Benakio, Hellenic Red Cross Hospital, Athens,
Greece.
Introduction
Papillary  thyroid microcarcinomas
(PTMC) are usually  considered low-risk
tumors  with  favorable  prognosis.  However,  a  small  percentage  behaves
aggressively and controversies exist for various prognostic factors. The aim of
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
this study was to evaluate demographic and tumor specific characteristics related
to PTMC invasiveness.
Patients - methods
This is a retrospective study of 510 thyroidectomized patients with PTMC who
were treated in two Endocrine Departments of Athens, between 1995 and 2015.
All data were obtained from the patients’ medical records. Most of the patients
underwent thyroidectomy for multinodular goiter (70.5%) and the rest for a single
nodule (29.5%). Demographic and tumor specific characteristics were evaluated.
Results
Patients’ mean age was 46.4G12.9 years. Women were more frequently affected
(84.5%) than men. Pathology of the tumors revealed classic papillary subtype in
55.4% of the patients, follicular variant in 35.4%, tall cell variant in 2.7%,
columnar variant in 0.2% and combinations less frequently. Regarding tumor
size, the median diameter was 8 mm (0.01-15). Patients were divided in three
subgroups regarding maximum tumor size as follows: 0-5 mm (47%), 6-10 mm
(46.6%) kai 11-15 mm (6.4%). Multifocality was observed in 34.9% of the
patients, while 3.4% had PTMC in more than three foci. The median diameter of
the sum of all foci was 8 mm (range 1-43 mm). Thyroid capsule invasion was
present in 25% of the patients, lymph node invasion in 8.7%, muscle or fat tissue
invasion in 6.4% and vessel invasion in 1.4%. Multiple regression analysis
revealed that PTMC variants, was the only independent predictive factor for
invasiveness.
Conclusions
Tumor subtype seems to be the most powerful prognostic factor for PTMCs
aggressiveness, as it is expressed by invasion of thyroid capsule or surrounding
tissues.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP219
GP220
Genomic alterations of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma detected
by targeted massive parallel sequencing of a BRAFV600E
mutation-prevalent area
Yun Jae Chung3, Min Ji Jeon1, Sung Min Chung2, Deokhoon Kim2,
Hyemi Kwon1, Won Gu Kim1, Young Kee Shong1, Dong Eun Song2 &
Won Bae Kim1
1Depatment of Internal Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea;2Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea;3Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University Hospital,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Background
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is the most aggressive type of thyroid cancer
and has no effective therapy. Due to its dismal prognosis, it is vital to understand
the genetic alterations of ATC and identify effective molecular targets. We
performed targeted next-generation sequencing to investigate the mutational
profile of ATC using a massive parallel sequencing approach.
Methods
DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded archival samples of 11 ATCs and
normal matched pairs were used. We identified 45 genetic alterations by targeted
exome sequencing. They were validated by mass spectrometric genotyping and
direct Sanger sequencing.
Results
The most commonly mutated gene was BRAF identified in ten samples (91%); all
showed the V600E point mutation. A KRAS point mutation was observed in the
one sample (9%) without the BRAF V600E mutation. All 11 ATCs harboured
BRAF or RAS mutations, reflecting the possibility that differentiated thyroid
carcinomas progress to ATCs after the accumulation of mutations. A loss of
function mutation of TP53 was observed in eight samples (73%) and a PIK3CA
mutation was observed in two samples (18%). We found 29 novel mutated genes
that had not previously been associated with ATC. Of these, loss of function
mutations of NF2, KMT2D and PKHD1 were repeatedly seen in three samples
(27%), two samples (18%) and two samples (18%), respectively. Using direct
Sanger sequencing, we also found two samples (18%) with a RASAL1 mutation.
KMT2D and RASAL1 mutations were significantly associated with shorter
ATC patient survival.
Conclusions
In  this  comprehensive  analysis  of  ATCs  using  targeted  massive  parallel
sequencing identified several novel mutations of ATCs, such as loss of function
mutations of NF2 or KMT2D. Future studies are needed to confirm the role of
these novel mutations as independent drivers for ATC development.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP220
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
GP221
Predictive value of SPECT/CT after radioiodine therapy in
differentiated thyroid cancer
Szabina Szujo1, Erzsebet Schmidt2, Zsuzsanna Szabo2, Sarolta Szekeres2,
Katalin Zambo2 & Emese Mezosi1
1Ist Department of Medicine, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary;
2Department of Nuclear Medicine, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary.
Purpose
SPECT/CT has numerous advantages over planar and traditional SPECT images.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of SPECT/CT after radioiodine
treatment of patients with differentiated thyroid cancer
(DTC) in early risk
classification and in prediction of late prognosis.
Methods
One hundred and eighty-one consecutive patients with DTC were investigated
after their first radioiodine treatment. The risk for recurrence based on ATA 2009
classification was low, intermediate and high in 67, 93 and 21 cases, respectively.
ETA classification showed low risk in 86, high risk in 95 patients. Planar image
from the neck, whole body scan and SPECT/CT from the neck and chest were
carried out in all patients 4-6 days after oral administration of 1100-3700 MBq
radioiodine.
Results
SPECT/CT was positive in 25.9% of patients, detecting lymph node metastases in
42, lung and bone involvement in 8 and 3 patients, respectively, resulting in the
early reclassification of 57 cases (31%). No evidence of disease was found in 140
cases at 9-12 months after radioiodine treatment and 144 patients at the end
of follow-up (median 55 months). The sensitivity, specificity and diagnostic
accuracy of risk classification systems to predict the persistence or relapse of the
tumor at one year were the followings: ATA: 94, 46, 55%; ETA: 88, 57, 63%;
SPECT/CT: 76, 85, 83%. The risk for late recurrence was reevaluated based on
the 1-year results. The 1-year risk prediction had high diagnostic value at the end
of follow-up: sensitivity: 97, specificity: 96, accuracy: 96%.
Conclusions
SPECT/CT after radioiodine treatment is useful in the early classification of
patients  and  influences  the  therapeutic  plan.  Risk  stratification  based  on
SPECT/CT has lower sensitivity and higher specificity and diagnostic accuracy
than ATA and ETA classification. Reevaluation of patients for risk of relapse is
required at 1-year follow-up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP221
GP222
Clinical outcome of thyroid nodules characterised as follicular
neoplasm or suspicious for a follicular neoplasm (The Bethesda System
for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology) after fine-needle aspiration
Mariana Tomé Fernández-Ladreda1, Carmen Bautista Recio1,
Esperanza Miranda2 & Daniel González Duarte1
1Endocrinología Y Nutricion. Hospital Punta De Europa, Algeciras, Cádiz,
Spain;2Medicina Interna, Hospital Punta De Europa, Algeciras, Cádiz,
Spain.
Introduction
Follicular neoplasm (FN) or suspicious for a follicular neoplasm category is
established  by  The  Bethesda  System  for  Reporting  Thyroid  Cytopathology
because of the necessity to identify a nodule that might be a follicular carcinoma
and triage it for surgical lobectomy. Estimated risk of malignancy for this
category is 15-30%.
Description of methods
We conducted a retrospective study that included all patients with a follicular
neoplasm result after thyroid fine-needle aspiration (FNA) between 2010 and
2014. The following variables were considered: age, necessity of surgery and type
of procedure (total or partial thyroidectomy), malignancy incidence rate.
Results
We studied 97 patients (85.6% female; mean age 53G15 years). Thyroidectomy
was performed in 62.9% of all patients. Lobectomy was the selected procedure in
32.8% of cases. 67.2% of patients underwent total thyroidectomy. The incidence
of malignancy was 16.4% of patients who underwent surgery (13.2% of the total
sample). Of those that proved to be malignant two Hurthle cell carcinomas, one
papillary carcinoma, one follicular carcinoma and two medullary carcinomas
were found. In 4 cases incidental papillary microcarcinoma were discovered after
surgery. 19.6% of benign lesions were follicular adenomas.
Conclusions
Follicular neoplasm or suspicious for a follicular neoplasm category is a useful
tool for classifying those thyroid FNA that may be suspicious for follicular
carcinoma and may help selecting patients that should undergo surgery. The
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
incidence of malignancy detected in our series is consistent with the incidence
expected by the Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP222
GP223
Macro, but not micrometastases, detected by OSNA technique are
related with more aggressive papillary thyroid cancer features
Carles Zafon, Carmela Iglesias, Oscar González, Jordi Temprana,
Enric Caubet, Amparo García-Burillo, Gabriel Obiols, Xavier Serres &
Jordi Mesa
Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction
Classically, risk stratification in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) assigned the
same magnitude of risk to all patients with regional lymph node involvement
(N1 disease). However, specific lymph node characteristics (such as size, number,
extension, etc.) will allow individualizing treatment and follow-up. One-Step
Nucleic Acid Amplification (OSNA) measures the number of copies of mRNA of
cytokeratin 19 (CK19) as a marker of lymph node metastasis. Thus, copy numbers
between 250 and 5000 were considered micrometastases (mM1), and more than
5000 copies were designated as macrometastases (MM1).
Objective
To analyze the influence of OSNA lymph node metastasis classification in the
histological characteristics of PTC in patients submitted to lymph node dissection
(LND).
Material and methods
LND from 40 patients (28 female, mean age 49G15 years old) were evaluated.
Lymph node metastases were detected using OSNA. Metastases characteristics
include total tumoral load (TTL), TTL per total lymph node weight (TTL/TLNW),
and mM1 versus MM1. According to the metastases status tumor related variables
were studied.
Results
A total of 513 lymph nodes were found, with a mean (S.D.) of 12.8 (9.5) per
patient. Thirty LND were considered positive for metastases (75%). There were
no  significant  differences  in  tumor  histological  variables  and  TTL  or
TTL/TLMW. According to mM1 versus MM1 status, there were 10 (25%)
patients with no lymph node involvement, 11 (27.5%) with only mM1, and 19
(47.5%) with at least one MM1. Only this last group was significantly related with
primary  tumor  size
(PZ0.04),  vascular  invasion
(PZ0.03),  extrathyroidal
extension (PZ0.04) and positive margin (PZ0.04).
Conclusion
Lymph  node  macrometastases  detected  by  OSNA  are  related  with  more
aggressive PTC. OSNA could be a useful technique to improve lymph node
metastases characterization.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP223
GP224
A cancer of undetermined significance - incidental thyroid carcinoma
Berna Evranos1, Sefika Burcak Polat2, Fatma Neslihan Cuhaci2,
Husniye Baser1, Oya Topaloglu2, Mehmet Kilic3, Aydan Kilicarslan4,
Reyhan Ersoy2 & Bekir Cakir2
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara,
Turkey;3Faculty of Medicine, Department of Surgery, Yildirim Beyazit
University, Ankara, Turkey;4Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Incidental thyroid carcinoma (ITC) in patients operated on for a benign disease is
frequent. ITC characteristics in patients operated for malign disease, but not
sampled by fine needle aspiration (FNA) or seen in ultrasonography, is unknown.
We aimed to compare ITC with nonincidental ITC (NITC) in this study.
Material and method
Retrospective analyses of 918 individual patients who were operated for benign
and  malign  thyroid  disease  in  our  hospital  between  December
2006
and
September 2014 and had a final histologic diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma were
enrolled in this study. All patients underwent ultrasonographic examination and
FNA biopsy was performed for all nodules O1 cm and nodules %1 cm with at
least  one  of  the  suspicious  ultrasonographic  findings  as  irregular  margins,
hypoechoism, increased internal vascularity and presence of microcalcifications.
The lesions in thyroidectomy specimens that did not represent the FNA or
ultrasonographic nodule target were classified as ITC. The lesions that match with
FNA results or ultrasonographic features were classified as NITC. Characteristics
of ITC and NITC were compared in this study.
Results
There were 1231 cancer foci in histopathology specimens. Among all these
cancer  foci,
687  were  detected  incidentally  while
635  were  detected  non-
incidentally. Mean age was 51.6G11.01 in ITC group and 48.1G13.1 in NITC
group (P!0.001). Mean size was 12 mm (1-90 mm) in NITC group while it was
3 mm (0.1-25 mm) in ITC group and differed significantly between the groups
(P!0.001).  Frequency  of  capsular  invasion
(37%/7.9%),  extrathyroidal
extension (16.2%/4.1%), non-complete resection (11.9%/2%) and lymph node
metastasis (9.1%/2.6%) were significantly higher in the NITC group (P!0.001).
Conclusion
ITC is often encountered in older patients and frequently determined in early
stages that can relieve the clinicians.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP224
GP225
Relationship between autoimmune thyroiditis and papillary thyroid
cancer
Jan Podoba, Marianna Grigerova, Emilia Mojtova & Martin Griger
St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Introduction
Coexistence of autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT) and papillary thyroid cancer (PTC)
has been well documented, but causality is still a matter of debate. Pathogenetic
links between PTC and AIT try to explain two theories: 1) PTC is induced or
facilitated by AIT, 2) AIT is a response to PTC. It is believed that PTC associated
to AIT has a better prognosis.
Aims
To find out: 1) the incidence of AIT in PTC patients, 2) the course of PTC
associated to AIT, 3) relationship between these diseases.
Methods
Histological and laboratory results of 1251 differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC)
patients were reviewed. 90% of them were PTC patients. Diagnosis of AIT was
based on histological finding and/or high antiTPO level (R 3-times above upper
reference range limit).
Results
The  incidence  of  AIT  in  DTC/PTC  patients  was
41%  (four-times  higher
compared to general population). PTC patients with coexisting AIT compared to
that without AIT had better prognostic indicators (TNM), e.g. significantly higher
incidence of micro- and small cancers (T1) and lower incidence of distant
metastases. These illusory favourable findings were caused by the fact, that 65%
of AIT patients were followed-up for this disease and PTC developed and was
revealed during this period. When we compared prognostic indicators of PTC
patients without AIT with those of PTC patients where AIT was revealed only
after operation, no significant difference were found out. AIT therefore does not
improve the clinical course of PTC patients.
Conclusions
We detected a high incidence of AIT in PTC patients. These data support the
hypothesis  that  AIT  is  a  predisposing  factor  in  the  development  of  PTC.
Clinicians should pay particular attention to thyroid nodules in AIT. AIT does not
represent a protective factor against spreading of PTC. At first sight better
prognosis  of  PTC  with  coexisting  AIT  is  not  caused  by  immunological
mechanisms, but by follow-up of AIT patients and therefore timely diagnosis
of PTC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP225
GP226
Systemic epidermal growth factor receptor-targeted gene delivery using
the theranostic sodium iodide symporter (NIS) gene in an advanced
orthotopic tumor model
Sarah Urnauer1, Stephan Morys2, Andrea M Muller1, Rosel Oos3,
Janette Carlsen3, Peter Bartenstein3, Ernst Wagner2 & Christine Spitzweg1
1Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of Munich,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany;2Department of
Pharmacy, Center of Drug Research, Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,
Ludwig-Maximilans-University, Munich, Germany;3Department of
Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital of Munich, Ludwig-Maximilians-
University, Munich, Germany.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
The well characterized sodium iodide symporter (NIS) in its dual function as
reporter and therapy gene displays an outstanding opportunity to target different
cancer types allowing non-invasive imaging of functional NIS expression and
therapeutic radionuclide application. We recently reported induction of tumor-
selective accumulation and therapeutic efficacy of radioiodide after systemic non-
viral epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeted NIS gene delivery in a
subcutaneous hepatocellular cancer (HuH7) xenograft tumor model.
As a next step towards clinical application, we investigated tumor specificity and
transduction  efficiency  of  EGFR-targeted  polyplexes  based  on  linear  poly-
ethylenimine (LPEI), polyethylene glycol (PEG), and the synthetic peptide GE11
as an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-specific ligand (LPEI-PEG-
GE11) as systemic NIS gene delivery vehicles in an advanced orthotopic tumor
model. HuH7 cells were injected directly into the liver leading to the development
of orthotopic liver tumors, representing a clinically more relevant model, as it
reflects the clinical situation more adequately including the tumor microenviron-
ment. In vitro experiments with LPEI-PEG-GE11/NIS polyplexes had already
demonstrated high levels of EGFR-specific transduction efficacy in HuH7 cells.
Mice with orthotopic HuH7 liver carcinomas showed high tumoral levels of
functional NIS protein expression 24 h after intravenous injection of LPEI-PEG-
GE11/NIS as shown by124I-PET/18F-TFB imaging and ex vivo biodistribution.
In contrast, injection of control vectors (LPEI-PEG-Cys/NIS) did not result in
specific iodide uptake.
In conclusion, our preclinical data confirm the enormous potential of EGFR-
targeted synthetic polymers for systemic NIS gene delivery in an advanced
orthotopic  tumor  model  and  open  the  exciting  prospect  of  NIS-mediated
radionuclide therapy in advanced disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP226
GP227
Is ultrasensitive Tg measurement capable of substituting for Tg
measurement after rhTSH stimulation in evaluation of effectiveness of
radioiodine ablation in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer
Aldona Kowalska, Danuta Gasior-Perczak, Iwona Palyga, Tomasz Trybek
& Anna Sluszniak
Holycross Cancer Centre, Kielce, Poland.
Introduction
Undetectable concentration of Tg after rhTSH stimulation (Tg/rhTSH) is one of
the most important criteria in evaluating the effectiveness of radioiodine ablation
in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) treated with 131I.
Aim
To evaluate the possibility of using L-T4
suppression treatment
(Tg/L-T4)
measurements  by  the  ultrasensitive  method  TRACE
(immunofluorescence
method) with the KRYPTOR analyzer instead of the Tg/rhTSH measurements
with the chemiluminescent immunoassay (CLIA).
Material
The study was performed on 34 consecutive DTC patients after surgery and
adjuvant treatment with 131I, referred for evaluation of ablation effectiveness
9 months after 131I treatment.
Method
Tg measurement was performed in patients during L-T4 treatment at two time
points: before administration of rhTSH and 5 days after the first injection, using
both tests: Tg detection with CLIA (analytical sensitivity 0.2 ng/ml and functional
sensitivity of 0.9 ng/ml) and Tg by TRACE (analytical sensitivity of 0.09 ng/ml
and functional sensitivity 0.15 ng/ml).
Results
Tg/L-T4 concentration in all patients was !1.0 ng/ml in the CLIA assay, and in
the range of !0.09 ng/ml - 0.354 ng/ml in the TRACE assay. After rhTSH
stimulation, Tg concentration of !1.0 ng/ml (excellent treatment response) as
measured by CLIA was found in 30/34 patients. In four patients, however,
Tg/rhTSH was in the range of 1.0-10.0 ng/ml (1.02, 1.83, 2.2, 9.24 ng/ml -
indeterminate response). In the latter group Tg/L-T4 by TRACE was 0.09 ng/ml;
0.1141 ng/ml; 0.1629 ng/ml; 0.09 ng/ml.
Conclusions
1 None of the four cases with indeterminate response to ablation showed elevated
Tg/L-T4 concentrations according to the ultrasensitive TRACE assay.
2 Results in our trial group do not entitle us to recommend determinations of
Tg/L-T4 with the TRACE method instead of the Tg/rhTSH in assessing the
ablation efficacy.
3 It is necessary to validate the method on a larger group of patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP227
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
GP228
Genetic heterogeneity of thyroid cancer
Carla Colombo1,2, Michela Perrino1,2, Marina Muzza1,2, Valentina Cirello1,2
& Laura Fugazzola1,3
1Endocrine Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Milan, Italy;2Department
of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy;3Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.
There are growing evidences suggesting the existence of intra-tumor hetero-
geneity within the same patient, leading to a different genetic pattern between
primary tumour and metastases.
We report a paradigmatic example of genetic heterogeneity in thyroid cancer
(TC). A 42 years old female patient was submitted, for a follicular TC, to total
thyroidectomy and lymphadenectomy followed by radioiodine residue ablation
in late 1999. In 2000 and 2001 diagnostic total body scans (TBS) were negative,
thyroglobulin
(Tg)  and  anti-thyroglobulin  antibodies
(TgAb)  under  TSH
stimulation were negative, and patient was considered cured until April 2005
when Tg levels began to progressively increase. Between July 2006 and February
2008 the patient was submitted to four additional radioiodine treatments for lung
metastases (total dose 27 750 MBq), with Tg levels ranging 30-40 ng/ml and
negative TgAb neg. Since then, Tg and TgAb levels continued to increase and in
November 2014 the patient was submitted to the surgical removal of a vertebral
metastasis. At the molecular analysis, this bone metastasis was shown to harbour
a C228T TERT mutation, while both the primary tumor and the lymph-node
metastases were negative for the mutation. Possible explanation to this interesting
finding are: 1) TERT mutation could have been acquired as a secondary event and
transmitted to a subset of tumor cells at the primary site (sub-clonal distribution),
2) TERT mutation could have been acquired at the metastatic site, 3) the primary
tumor could have been polyclonal. The present case clearly demonstrate that
thyroid cancer can be genetically heterogeneous. This finding is highly relevant
because clinicians must consider that the genetic pattern found in the primary
tumor, that in some cases have oriented the clinical and therapeutic decisions,
may evolve during tumor progression, in particular in the regional or distant
metastases, also due to the selection pressure of treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP228
GP229
ALK alterations in thyroid cancer
Irene Kleinlein1,2, Heinrich Furst3, Gisela Keller4, Tanja Seehaus1,
Wilko Weichert4 & Markus Kremer1,4
1Department of Pathology, Staedtisches Klinikum, Munich, Germany;
2Institute of Pathology, University Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany;
3Department of Surgery, Hospital Martha-Maria, Munich, Germany;
4Institute of Pathology, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
Background
Thyroid cancer is the most frequent endocrine malignancy, with O7000 cases
diagnosed in central Europe every year. Recently, ALK/EML4 translocations
have been reported in single cases in anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC). Little is
known about the frequency of ALK alterations in poorly differentiated thyroid
cancer (PTC). Our aim was to investigate the frequency of ALK alterations in
patients with advanced thyroid carcinomas.
Material and methods
Formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) samples of 60 ATC and 55 PTC
were analyzed. Five samples of goiters served as controls. FFPE samples were
investigated  immunohistochemically  with  different  antibodies  against  ALK
(clone D5F3, Cell Signaling Technology, and clone 5A4, Leica Biosystems).
Stainings were analyzed quantitatively using a grid ocular, with an arbitrarily
cut-off level of 10%. Additionally, fluorescence in situ (FISH) analysis was
performed on tissue microarrays using Vysis ALK Break apart FISH probe
(Abbott Laboratories), with a cut-off level of 15%.
Results
Of all investigated thyroid cancers, 10% of ATC and 27% of PTC showed
immunohistochemically a light to moderate nuclear staining for ALK. All five
controls were negative for ALK. FISH analysis showed single breaks without
reaching the cut-off level for ALK/EML4 translocations.
Discussion
The occurrence of ALK/EML4 translocations is a rare event in ATC and PTC,
with no verifiable case in our series. However, in contrast to the reported
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
ALK-stainings, which were cytoplasmatic, we found a nuclear positivity in 10%
of ATC and 27% of PTC, which has been not described in thyroid cancers so far.
According to the recently described RANBP2-ALK translocation in epitheloid
inflammatory myofibroblastic sarcoma, which show a nuclear ALK expression
in immunohistochemical staining, further studies are necessary to clarify the
significance of nuclear ALK stainings in thyroid carcinoma, and a possible
different break event of the ALK gene.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP229
GP230
Analysis of germline VEGF-A SNPs allows the identification of a
subgroup of ATA low-intermediate risk DTC (differentiated thyroid
cancer) patients with poor probability to develop recurrences
Vincenzo Marotta1, Concetta Sciammarella1, Mario Capasso1,2,
Alessandro Testori1,2, Claudio Gambardella3, Marica Grasso4,
Manila Rubino1, Maurizio De Palma4, Maria Grazia Chiofalo5,
Claudia Pivonello1, Rosario Pivonello1, Luigi Santini3,
Luciano Pezzullo5, Annamaria Colao1 & Antongiulio Faggiano1,5
1Federico II University, Naples, Italy;2CEINGE “Biotecnologie avanzate”,
Naples, Italy;3Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy;4Cardarelli
Hospital, Naples, Italy;5INT Pascale, Naples, Italy.
Introduction
Constitution of new blood vessels is crucial for cancer self-maintenance and
progression. Neo-angiogenesis may be affected from hereditary traits, namely the
presence of SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) of genes involved in its
regulation. VEGF-A represents the main regulator of angiogenesis. Germline
SNPs of the VEGF-A gene have been associated to outcome of several cancers,
but no data exist about differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC).
Patients and methods
Multicenter retrospective study. Blood samples were obtained from consecutive
DTC-patients afferent to included centers (Federico II University, “INT Pascale”
Institute, “Cardarelli” Hospital, Second University of Naples). Four VEGF-A
SNPs (rs2010963, rs699947, rs833061, rs3025039) were chosen basing on their
probable functional impact and genotyped using TaqMan protocol (Applied
biosystems StepOnePlus). Clinico-pathological data at diagnosis and prognostic
outcome  were  retrieved.  The  genotypes  were  analyzed  as  a  three-group
categorical  variable
(reference  model)  and  according  to  the  dominant  and
recessive model. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) was analyzed using HAPLO-
VIEW. Primary endpoint was rate of recurrent disease.
Results
Overall, 249 patients were included. Allele frequencies were consistent with data
from the National Center for Biotechnology Information Databank. Genotype
frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (PO0.05). Outcome analysis
was restricted to 226 patients classified as low-intermediate risk of recurrence
according to ATA (America Thyroid Association) system, having a median
follow-up of 4 years. Homozygous minor allele genotypes of rs699947 and
rs833061 SNPs (A/A and C/C, respectively) were associated with a significantly
lower rate of recurrent disease (PZ0.035 and 0.031, respectively). rs699947 and
rs833061 SNPs were in LD (D’Z1). The combination of the genotypes A/A of
rs699947 and C/C of rs833061 had PPV of non-recurrent disease of 97.3%
(95%CI 85.84-99.93).
Conclusions
Analysis  of  germline  VEGF-A  SNPs  refines  risk  stratification  of  DTC  by
identifying  a  subgroup  of  ATA  low-intermediate  patients  with  excellent
prognosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP230
GP231
Antiproliferative actions of 1,25(OH)2D3 in differentiated thyroid
carcinoma are dependent on Sirtuin1 activity
Natascha Rohlen1, Claudia Doring2, Martin-Leo Hansmann2,
Klaus Badenhoop1 & Marissa Penna-Martinez1
1Department of Internal Medicine I, University Frankfurt, Frankfurt,
Hessen, Germany;2Senckenberg Institute for Pathology, University
Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Hessen, Germany.
Antiproliferative actions of 1,25(OH)2D3 (1,25D), the active form of Vitamin D,
are reported in various types of cancer, whereas little is known about the
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
underlying molecular mechanism. Interestingly, in non thyroid-cancer cells,
stimulation with 1,25D has been shown to affect cell proliferation in a Sirtuin 1
(Sirt1) dependent manner. Sirtuin histon deacetylases are key factors in cell
metabolism recently found to be overexpressed in different carcinomas. The aim
of the present study was to investigate the relevance of Sirt1 and the existence of a
1,25D-Sirt1
pathway in differentiated thyroid carcinoma
(DTC). Sirt1 gene
expression was analyzed in human DTC (nZ13) and goiter tissue (nZ11) by
quantitative real-time PCR with CT-value defined as 2K[CTSirt1-CTGAPDH] !106.
Furthermore, cells of papillary thyroid cancer cell line BCPAP were cultivated at
5!105 cell test approaches and incubated with or without (ZCo) the following
stimuli:
1,25D,  Sirt1
inhibitor Ex-527
(Ex)  or  ExC1,25D.  After  96h, cell
proliferation was measured by Neubauer counting chamber and Sirt1 gene
expression was analyzed. In order to investigate the influence of 1,25D action
on Sirt1 activity, stimulation with
1,25DCEx was compared to stimulation
with 1,25D alone. DTC showed enhanced Sirt1 expression in comparison to
goiter tissue (DTC vs. goiter, 1.9!104 vs 7.7!103 2K[CTSirt1-CTGAPDH] !106 pc:
4!10K2). Moreover, in cell culture 1,25D inhibited DTC proliferation (mean cell
count: 1,25D vs CoZ5.6!105 vs 1.2!106 cells/ml, pc: 6!10K4). Interestingly,
addition of Ex to 1,25D reduced the cell suppressive effect of 1,25D (ExC1,25D
vs 1,25DZ9.5!105 vs 5.6!105 cells/ml, pc: 6!10K4). However, none of the
stimuli affect Sirt1
gene expression. This study indicates Sirt1
to be over-
expressed in DTC. Furthermore, antiproliferative actions of 1,25D on papillary
thyroid cancer cells appear to be dependent on Sirt1 activity, indicating the
existence of a 1,25D regulated Sirt1 signal transduction in thyroid cancer cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP231
GP232
Does serum Galectin-3 add value in thyroid cancer diagnosis?
Ruxandra Dobrescu1, Sorina Schipor1, Dana Manda1, Catalina Picu1,
Cosmin Giulea2, Ana-Maria Niculescu3, Corin Badiu1,4 &
Andra Caragheorgheopol1,4
1“C.I. Parhon” National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;
2“Elias” University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;
3SC AGILROM Scientific SA, Bucharest, Romania;4“Carol Davila”
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Background
The role of circulating Galectin-3 as a potential biomarker of malignancy in
thyroid disease remains inconclusive. In a previous pilot study we reported a
significant difference between serum Gal-3 levels in papillary thyroid carcinoma
(PTC) patients and those with benign pathology, but no association with tumor
aggressiveness.
Aim
We measured serum Gal-3 levels in a larger series of patients submitted to
thyroidectomy, in order to assess its value as possible biomarker in PTC.
Patients and methods
We retrospectively investigated serum Gal-3 in 190 patients, aged 49.09G13.55
years,
151 women (79.5%) and 39 men (20.5%). Patients, who gave their
informed written consent, were divided in two groups, based on the pathology
report: benign disease (NZ88) and PTC (NZ102). The thyroid cancer group was
analyzed according to pathological stage, histological subtype, multifocality,
invasion and tumor size. Sera were collected before surgery. Gal-3 was measured
by Elisa, using a monoclonal antibody specific for human Gal-3 (R&D Systems).
The study was approved by Ethics Committee of the Institute.
Results
According to the pathology tumor stage (T1-T4), the thyroid cancer patients were
divided in four subgroups: PTC1 (NZ35), PTC2 (NZ21), PTC3 (NZ41) and
PTC4 (NZ5). We found no significant difference in serum Gal-3 levels between
cancer and non-cancer patients (9.98G2.66 ng/ml vs 8.11G2.81 ng/ml, PZNS),
or  between  different  PTC  stages
(PTC1:8.01G2.39 ng/ml  vs  PTC2:7.66G
2.26 ng/ml vs PTC3: 8.36G2.95 ng/ml vs PTC4:9.57G2.78 ng/ml, PZNS for all
comparisons). Serum Gal-3 did not discriminate between unifocal vs multifocal
PTC or invasive vs non-invasive tumors. There was no correlation between serum
Gal-3 and tumor size (rZ0.05).
Conclusion
The analysis of a large series of patients with tumor thyroid disease, using a highly
specific Gal-3 antibody, revealed no difference in serum Gal-3 between cancer
and non-cancer patients and no correlation with tumor aggressiveness, suggesting
no benefit in its use as a diagnostic test in thyroid cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP232
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
GP233
Malignancy risk and false negative rate of fine needle aspiration
cytology in thyroid nodules equal or greater than 4 cm
Nagihan Bestepe1, Didem Ozdemir1, Abbas Ali Tam1, Fatma Dilek Dellal1,
Aydan Kilicarslan2, Omer Parlak3, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Yildirim Beyazit University, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Department, Ankara, Turkey;2Yildirim
Beyazit University, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Pathology
Department, Ankara, Turkey;3Yildirim Beyazit University, Ataturk
Education and Research Hospital, General Surgery Department,
Ankara, Turkey.
Background
We aimed to evaluate malignancy rate in thyroid nodules R4 cm and determine
false negativity of fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) in these nodules.
Methods
Patients who underwent thyroidectomy between January 2007 and December
2014 in our institution were reviewed. Demographical and clinical data and
preoperative ultrasonography (US) findings were obtained from the medical
records. The nodules in these patients were grouped as R4 cm and !4 cm
according to US measurements. Nodules !4 cm were further divided into
1-3.9 cm  and
!1 cm.  US  features  and  malignancy  rates  were  compared.
Histopathologically malignant nodules with preoperative benign cytology were
defined to have false negative FNAB.
Results
Data of 5561 nodules in 2463 patients were analyzed. There were 1008 nodules
R4 cm, 4013 nodules 1-3.9 cm and 540 nodules !1 cm. Histopathologically,
8.5, 10.2 and 25.6% of nodules R4 cm, 1-3.9 cm and !1 cm were malignant,
respectively
(P!0.001).  There  was  no  significant  difference  between  the
1-3.9 cm and R4 cm nodules with respect to malignancy (PZ0.108). Preo-
perative US features were similar in histopathologically benign and malignant
nodules R4 cm, except higher prevalence of hypoechoic appearance in malignant
ones (PZ0.02). False negativity rates were 4.7% (32/683) in R4 cm, 2.2%
(45/2093) in 1-3.9 cm and 4.8% (10/206) in !1 cm nodules. !1 cm and R4 cm
nodules had similar false negativity (PZ0.93), while 1-3.9 cm nodules had statis-
tically lower false negativity than both groups (PZ0.03 and P!0.001, respectively).
Conclusion
Malignancy rate in thyroid nodules R4 cm is similar with nodules 1-3.9 cm.
Although false negativity of FNAB was significantly higher in R4 cm than 1-3.9 cm
nodules, the rate was 4.7% which we think not high enough to recommend routine
surgery when cytology was benign.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP233
GP234
TROP-2 is a novel reliable marker for immunohistochemical diagnosis
of papillary thyroid carcinoma
Andrey Bychkov, Pichet Sampatanukul, Shanop Shuangshoti &
Somboon Keelawat
Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
Introduction
Immunohistochemistry
(ihc)  in  thyroid  pathology  is  often  recruited  for
differentiating between challenging benign and malignant tumors. There is no
single  antibody  that  can  render  definitive  diagnosis.  Most  of  the  recently
identified ihc markers have never been assimilated into daily clinical practice due
to their low reproducibility and other associated limitations. Trop-2 ihc was
recently reported as a useful tool for identifying papillary thyroid carcinoma (ptc)
in fine-needle aspirate and tissue microarray samples. We aimed to validate trop-2
utility in the differential diagnosis of thyroid tumors on whole slide sections using
automated digital image analysis.
Materials and methods
Trop-2 immunostaining was performed on a wide range of thyroid tumors
(nZ226) and controls (nZ207).
Results
Normal thyroid, nodular goiter, hashimoto’s thyroiditis, graves’ disease, follicular
adenoma, follicular carcinoma, and medullary carcinoma samples were negative
for trop-2 ihc. The majority of ptc specimens (94/114, 82.5%) were positive for
trop-2;  however,  the  pattern  of  staining  differed  significantly  between  the
histopathological variants. All papillary microcarcinomas
(mptc), ptc classic
variant (ptc cv), and tall cell variant (ptc tcv) were trop-2-positive with mainly
diffuse staining. In contrast, less than half of ptc follicular variant specimens
were positive for trop-2, with only focal immunoreactivity. Trop-2 could identify
ptc cv with high diagnostic performance (sensitivity 98.1%, specificity 97.5%,
area under curve 98%). Roc curve analysis found that O10% of trop-2-positive
cells in a tumor support a diagnosis of ptc. Trop-2 h-score was significantly
associated with ptc variant and presence of capsular invasion in encapsulated ptc
fv (P!0.001). None of the baseline (age, gender) and clinical (tumor size, nodal
disease, tnm stage) parameters were associated with trop-2 expression.
Conclusion
Trop-2 membranous staining is a very sensitive and specific marker for ptc cv,
ptc tcv, and mptc - with high overall specificity for ptc.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP234
GP235
Thyroid nodules: a highly specific molecular and cytological combined
predictor of malignancy
Hélène Lasolle1,2, Benjamin Riche1,4, Myriam Decaussin1,2,
Emmanuelle Dantony1,4, Catherine Cornu1,4, Jean-Christophe Lifante1,2,
Oana-Maria Capraru3,1, Bernard Rousset1,2, Françoise Borson-Chazot1,2 &
Pascal Roy1,4
1Hospices civils de Lyon, Lyon, France;2Université Claude-Bernard
Lyon 1, Lyon, France;3Université de médecine et Pharmacie, Targu Mures,
Romania;4Université Lyon 1 LBBE UMR CNRS 5558, Lyon, France.
Thyroid nodules are very common and benign in most cases. Thus, malignancy
detection  avoiding  overtreatment  is  a  challenge.  Nodule  evaluation  mainly
supports on US and fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC). The Bethesda
classification (BC) for reporting thyroid cytopathology is now currently used for
the interpretation of results but it does not enable classifying 30% of samples.
The objective was to identify, by transcriptome analysis, a molecular signature to
improve the accuracy of preoperative diagnosis of nodules. We built a combined
Bethesda-Molecular predictor that takes into account the prevalence of the
disease.
Methods
In this prospective study, 722 patients with a solid thyroid nodule more than one
centimetre diameter underwent FNAC. The molecular test, a transcriptomic array
of 20 genes selected from a previous study, was performed on FNA material in
operated patients. The optimal set of genes was identified using a logistic
regression model to discriminate malignant and non-malignant nodules and was
constituted of 7 genes. The performances of a combined predictor (molecular test
in addition to BC) were compared to that of BC alone using the area under the
ROC curve (AUC) for different levels of malignancy prevalence.
Results
Among the 225 operated nodules, 128 underwent the molecular test. In these
patients, with a prevalence of malignancy of
36%, the combined predictor
presented a
95%  specificity and a 76% sensitivity. The AUC  was 93.5%;
significantly  higher  than  the  AUC  of  BC  alone
(PZ0.004). In a general
population of unselected nodules with an estimated prevalence of malignancy of
7%, the specificity of the test would be optimal (100%), but sensitivity would be
lower (47.8%).
Conclusion
This very specific molecular test improves the detection of thyroid cancer in
addition to standard cytological analysis and may be particularly useful in case of
indeterminate result at cytological analysis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP235
GP236
Utility of ultrasound shear wave elastography for diagnosis of
malignant thyroid nodules: evaluation of maximum and standard
deviation elasticity values
Hye Jeong Kim, Mi Kyung Kwak, Hyeong Kyu Park, Dong Won Byun,
Kyoil Suh & Myung Hi Yoo
Soonchunhyang University Hospital, Soonchunhyang University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Background
Shear wave elastography (SWE) is an emerging technique that can be used to
evaluate malignancy in many organs. The aim of this study was to address the role
of elasticity indices as a possible predictive marker for detecting papillary thyroid
carcinoma (PTC) and quantitative assessment of SWE for differential diagnosis of
benign and malignant thyroid nodules.
Methods
One hundred and nineteen patients with thyroid nodules undergoing SWE before
ultrasound (US)-fine needle aspiration (FNA) were analyzed. The SWE elasticity
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
indices of mean (EMean), minimum (EMin), maximum (EMax) and its standard
deviation (ESD) of nodules were measured.
Results
Among a total of 105 nodules, 14 were PTC and 91 were benign. EMean
(PZ0.005),  EMin
(PZ0.034),  EMax
(P!0.001),  and  ESD
(P!0.001)  were
significantly higher in PTCs than in benign nodules. The cut-off values with high
accuracy of EMax and ESD for predicting PTCs were 45.9 kPa, achieved 57.1%
sensitivity and 88.1% specificity, and 5.0 kPa, achieved 71.4% sensitivity and
88.1% specificity, respectively. No thresholds produced high sensitivity without
lowering specificity appreciably, and vice versa.
Conclusions
Although the quantitative assessment of SWE was significantly higher in PTCs
than benign nodules, the precision results do not suggest a definitive role for SWE
in identifying or excluding thyroid malignancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP236
GP237
The origin of patients with inherited medullary thyroid cancer, who are
carriers of the rare exon 8 mutation (G533C) of the RET gene in Greece
Katerina Saltiki1, Elli Anagnostou1, Anastasia Angelopoulou1,
Sofia Kouki1, Michail Apostolakis1, Lida Sarika2, Alexandra Papathoma2 &
1
Maria Alevizaki
1Endocrine Unit, Department Med Therapeutics, Athens University School
of Medicine, Athens, Greece;2Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes,
ALEXANDRA Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Mutations in the ret gene are responsible for the transmission of inherited
medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). In recent years a high prevalence of the ‘rare’
exon 8 mutation (G533C) has been found in patients with inherited MTC in
Greece. The aim of this study was to record with more detail the place of origin of
these families in the country.
Design
We analysed the details of 44 patients belonging to 22 families who were carriers
of the ret G533C mutation. Data concerning their place of origin as well as that of
their ancestors were collected. Patients were distributed in four age groups (G1-4)
according to age at diagnosis.
Results
The age at diagnosis was 21.0G2.9 (youngest age group G1, nZ4), 37.7G
5.5(G2, nZ30), 54.1G4.4 (G3, nZ8), 72.5G0.7 (G4, oldest, nZ2) years. The
patients belonged to 22 families, 15 of which were index cases diagnosed in our
centre. Twelve belonged to G2, two to G3 and one in G4. ‘Hot spots’ for the origin
of these families were recognized. Nine families originated from central/western
Greece in an area around Lake Trichonis, and Fokis, nine originated from
Peloponese (Lakonia (mount Parnon region) and Arcadia), three from the Attika
region (two from Pireaus) and four families from Asia Minor, all of them without
any recognised familial relationship. No phenotype or outcome differences were
found between the families from the various regions.
Conclusions
The  majority  of  the  ret  gene  exon8
(G533C)  carriers  originate  from
Central/Western  Greece  and  Peloponese.  Increased  awareness  for  inherited
disease is required for patients with apparently sporadic MTC originating from
these areas, as the age at presentation is usually delayed (25-70 years).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP237
GP238
Correlation between basal and stimulated thyroglobulin in
differentiated thyroid carcinoma of intermediate and high risk
Paola Senes, Annapina De Rosa, Rosa Maria Paragliola, Giampaolo Papi,
Pietro Locantore, Alfredo Pontecorvi & Salvatore Maria Corsello
Unit of Endocrinology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
Thyroglobulin (Tg) is a highly sensitive tumor marker of differentiated thyroid
cancer
(DTC).  To  optimize  the  sensitivity,  guidelines  recommend  Tg
measurement after stimulation with recombinant TSH (rh-TSH) 6-12 months
after radio remnant ablation (RRA). Based on recent evidence in Literature, it is
possible to avoid the measurement of Tg after stimulation with rh-TSH (S-Tg) in
presence of undetectable values of basal Tg (B-Tg) if high functional sensitivity
(0.1 ng/ml) method is used. However, most patients enrolled in the available
studies  are  affected  by  low-risk  DTC,  while  there  are  less  evidence  in
intermediate and high risk patients.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
A retrospective analysis on 113 intermediate or high risk DTC patients has been
performed. Risk stratification has been evaluated on the basis of 2009 ATA guide-
lines but our data were also considered on the basis of new ATA guidelines (2015).
Patients were tested for B-Tg and S-Tg. All patients with undetectable B-Tg showed
S-Tg !1 ng/ml (sensitivity: 100%). B-Tg cut-off showing best sensitivity and
specificity
(100%  and  99%  respectively)  in  predicting  S-Tg
!2 ng/ml  was
0.22 ng/ml while in predicting S-Tg !1 ng/ml was 0.09 ng/ml (sensibility 100%,
specificity 86%).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
The  cut-off  appeared  independent  from  the  variables  analyzed
(pT,  N,  M,
aggressive variants). Moreover, the cut-off appeared independent from Tg values
during thyroid hormone withdrawal at the moment of radio remnant ablation.
We conclude that undetectable B-Tg values can predict the biochemical remission
of DTC alternatively to S-Tg if high sensitivity assay is used, also in patients with
intermediate or high risk DTC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.GP238
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Eposter Presentations
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Adrenal cortex (to include Cushing’s)
EP1
Establishment and characterization of immortalized porcine
11b HSD1-hepatocytes
Hee Young Kang, Jeong Ung Hwang, Myoungho Lee, Jin Yong An &
Eui-Bae Jeung
College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.
Glucocorticoid,  known  as  cortisol,  is  a  steroid  hormone  essential  to  the
maintenance of homeostasis, and is released in response to stress and low
blood glucose concentration. It is converted from cortisone by 11b hydroxy-
steroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11b HSD1). The liver plays a major organ in
metabolism, has numerous functions, mostly consists of hepatocytes, and is a
principal target of cortisol. In murine model, it was observed that too much
cortisol or overexpression of 11b HSD1 induced obesity and the insulin resistance
that  accompanies  metabolic  syndrome.  In  our  previous  study,
11b  HSD1-
transgenic (TG) fibroblasts were established and then the porcine model was
generated by SCNT using those fibroblasts. Hepatocytes overexpressing 11b
HSD1 isolated from liver of this porcine model, and in vitro cultured. However,
primary  hepatocytes showed short life span and low proliferation  rate. To
overcome these problems, SV40 large T antigen, oncogene, was transduced into
primary
11b  HSD1-TG  hepatocytes  and  those  cells  were  immortalized.
Immortalized 11b HSD1-TG hepatocytes shows restored morphology, more
rapid proliferation rate, and more expression of 11b HSD1 than primary ones.
Immortalized 11b HSD1-TG hepatocytes increase the expression of gluconeo-
genic  genes  including  G6Pase  and  PEPCK  by  cortisone  treatment.  These
immortalized  cells  maybe  be  useful  for  studying  traits  and  potential
pharmarcotherapeutic drugs for metabolic disorders induced by overexpression
of 11b HSD1 in hepatocytes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1
EP2
Effect of heterophilic antibody interference in ACTH immunoassay to
Subclinical Cushing’s Syndrome screening: A pilot study
Serkan Yener, Seciil Ozisik, Umit Cavdar, Mustafa Demirpence &
Abdurrahman Comlekci
Eylul University, Division of Endocrinology, Izmir, Turkey.
Heterophilic  antibodies  are  well-known  interferent  factors  affecting  most
immunoassays. However, they have been poorly evaluated in routine clinical
practice. Definition of Subclinical Cushing’s Syndrome (SCs) has been arbitrary
and prevalence has shown significant variations related with the diversity of the
diagnostic tests. In most of the guidelines a low or suppressed corticothropin
(ACTH) level has been suggested as an important predictor of SCs. Here, we
sought to investigate the burden of heterophilic antibody interference in ACTH
immunoassays in SCs screening.
We  designed  a  pilot  study  including  all  referred  individuals
(nZ72) with
incidentally discovered adrenal adenomas between June 2015 and January 2016.
We identified seven individuals having disproportionally elevated ACTH levels
(O15 pg/ml) despite non-suppressed 1 mg DST(O2.5 mg/dl). In four of the
subjects, polyethylene glycol precipitation (PEG) showed decreased recovery
suggesting a high molecular weight interfering substance.
Interference  in  immunoassays  is  a  well-known  but  usually  underestimated
problem,  leading  to  discordant  results  and  unnecessary,  time  consuming,
expensive additional tests. A simple method using PEG precipitation of ACTH
samples could distinguish individuals with suppressed ACTH levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP2
EP3
Pro-coagulant imbalance in patients with Cushing disease detected by
thrombin generation assay is associated with increased levels of
neutrophil extracellular trap-related factors
Elisa Verrua1, Elisa Sala1, Elena Malchiodi1, Emanuele Ferrante1,
Giorgio Arnaldi2, Laura Trementino2, Armando Tripodi3,
Fabrizio Semeraro4, Concetta T Ammollo4, Mario Colucci3,
Lidia Padovan3, Veena Chantarangkul3, Flora Peyvandi5 &
Giovanna Mantovani1
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
1Unit of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Department of Clinical Sciences and
Community Health, University of Milan, Milano, Italy;2Clinica di
Endocrinologia e Malattie del Metabolismo, Ospedali Riuniti di Ancona,
Ancona, Italy;3Angelo Bianchi Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis
Center, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of
Milan, Milano, Italy;4Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human
Oncology, Aldo Moro University, Bari, Italy;5Angelo Bianchi Bonomi
Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center, Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, University of Milan, Milano, Italy.
Patients  with  Cushing  disease
(CD)  are  at  increased  risk  of  venous
thromboembolism (VTE). It was surmised, but not conclusively shown that the
risk  is  related  to  plasma  hypercoagulability  secondary  to  the  effect  of
glucocorticoids. This study aimed at investigating the thrombin-forming potential
of patients with CD in the presence of a functioning protein C system by adding its
main  physiological  activator,  thrombomodulin.  Under  these  experimental
conditions, which mimic closely the in vivo situation, we observed significantly
enhanced thrombin-generation in patients with CD, as shown by the modification
of thrombin generation parameters (i.e., shortened lag-time and time-to-peak,
increased thrombin-peak and endogenous-thrombin-potential (ETP)). Moreover,
the  ETP  ratio
(with/without  thrombomodulin),  recognized  as  an  index  of
hypercoagulability, was increased in patients as compared to controls, indicating
that patients with CD are resistant to the anticoagulant action of thrombomodulin.
We attempted to explain such hypercoagulability by measuring both pro- and
anticoagulants  factors  and  some  other  non-coagulation  parameters
(i.e.,
neutrophil extracellular traps (NET), recently associated with the risk of VTE
and/or increased procoagulant imbalance. We show that the hypercoagulability
detected by thrombin-generation in patients with CD is associated with increased
levels  of factor  VIII  and  NET-related  variables.  Whether  this  plasma
hypercoagulability can entirely explain the occurrence of VTE (first event or
recurrence) in patients with CD should be investigated by ad hoc clinical trials.
However,  until  these  studies  will  be  available  the  evidence  for  the
hypercoagulability supports the concept that patients with CD are candidates
for antithrombotic prophylaxis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP3
EP4
Missed opportunities for appropriate diagnosis and management of
profound hyponatraemia - Audit of District General Hospital
experience
Paris Limin Cai, Christopher James Thomas, Qaiser Zeb, Cosmas Anazodo
& Mohamed Malik
Scunthorpe General Hospital, Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology,
Scunthorpe, UK.
Population and methodology
Patients with profound hyponatraemia (serum Na %125 mmol/l) admitted 1
November 2014 to 30 April 2015 were identified using hospital admission
registry, laboratory’s database and qualitative data from the patients’ electronic
records. Discharge summaries and death certificates were reviewed.
Objectives
This is a retrospective audit set to asses: i) whether initial investigations of
hyponatraemia were performed in accordance to published European guidelines.
ii) incidence of profound hyponatraemia among acutely ill iii) sodium level on
discharge and crude mortality.
Results
201 patients (59% females) with serum sodium of %125 were admitted during the
audit period. Serum Na ranged between 125 and 105 mmol/l, with 10% having Na
(114. Incident increased with age (37% were O80 years).
Overall incidence of profound hyponatraemia in patients presenting to A&E
department for the audit period was 2.51%.
In hospital mortality including 6 weeks post-discharge was 19% (38 patients).
When deceased patients were excluded, only 32 out of remaining 163 patients
(20%) had complete initial investigations. These were completed within 24 hours
of presentation in nine out of 32 patients (28%), 24-72 h in 10 (31%), and O72 h
in 13 (41%). Of the 131 patients (80%) who did not have essential investigations,
only 40 (31%) had recorded cause of hyponatraemia.
Discharge Na ranged between 120 and 146 with trend of improvement (average
DC7.87%).
For  deceased  patients Na  level  ranged  between
113  and 125,  with  varied
registered cause of death.
Conclusion
Significant profound/severe hyponatraemia is common in acutely ill patients
with increased incidence in elderly and associated with high crude mortality.
Current practice lag well behind the desired standard of appropriate management.
Three strategies were proposed to improve management; i) Electronic pop up
alert, ii) readily available checklist, and iii) Incorporation of diagnosis in patients’
records.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP4
EP5
Paradoxical worsening of lipid metabolism after successful treatment of
primary aldosteronism
Christian Adolf1, Evelyn Asbach1, Anna Dietz1, Stefanie Hahner2,
Marcus Quinkler3, Lars Christian Rump4, Martin Bidlingmaier1,
Marcus Treitl1, Klaus Hallfeldt5, Felix Beuschlein1 & Martin Reincke1
1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Ludwig-Maximi-
lians-Universitat, Munchen, Germany;2Medizinische Klinik I, Julius-
Maximilians-Universitat, Wurzburg, Germany;3Endokrinologiepraxis
in Charlottenburg, Berlin, Germany;4Klinik fur Nephrologie, Heinrich
Heine Universitat, Dusseldorf, Germany;5Klinik fur Viszeral- und
Endokrine Chirurgie, Klinikum der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat,
Munchen, Germany.
Primary aldosteronism (PA) describes the most frequent cause of secondary
arterial hypertension. Aldosterone itself represents a BP-independent cardiovas-
cular risk factor associated with increased rates of morbidity and mortality.
Recently a worsening of lipid metabolism after treatment has been described.
Objective
Our aim was to analyse changes in lipid parameters according to treatment
outcome in PA patients. Data of 215 consecutive PA patients with unilateral
aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA, nZ144) or bilateral idiopathic adrenal
hyperplasia (IHA, nZ71) were extracted from the database of the German Conn’s
Registry.
To assess the metabolic outcome, they were investigated before, one year and three
years after treatment by adrenalectomy (ADX) or by MR-antagonist (MRA).
Results
One year after initiation of treatment potassium had been normalized in all
patients. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and triglycerides (TG)
changed inversely. HDL-C was significantly lower in patients with APA (53.00
(45.3; 67) vs 52.00 (44; 65) mg/dl, PZ0.046) and IHA (52.00 (42; 66) vs 48.00
(39; 62) mg/dl, PZ0.004) after treatment. TG were significantly higher in both
subgroups at follow-up (APA 103.5 (69.3; 148.0) vs 111.0 (78.3; 166.5) mg/dl,
PZ0.000; IHA 111.0 (82; 150) vs 129.0 (85; 195) mg/dl, PZ0.020), whereas
BMI remained unchanged and fasting plasma glucose (FPG) even improved in
follow-up patients with APA (99.0 (90; 109) vs 95.0 (88; 104) mg/dl, PZ0.004).
Changes in the HDL-C-to-TG ratio at one year follow-up correlated with decrease
of GFR (bZ0.184, PZ0.024) in multivariate analysis but not with change in
potassium, urea or urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR). After two more years
there was a slight further decline in GFR (PZ0.012), whereas HDL-C remained
stable.
Conclusion
Our results show that treatment of PA is associated with a worsening of lipid
parameters  despite  improved  glucose  parameters  and  stable  BMI.  This
paradoxical effect could be explained by renal dysfunction following ADX or
MRA treatment caused by a decrease in glomerular hyperfiltration. In view of
stable low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, reduced albuminuria, FPG and blood
pressure, however, a higher risk for atherosclerosis in patients with PA after
treatment seems unlikely.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP5
EP6
Bilateral adrenalectomy is a safe long-term procedure
Moutarde Coralie, Caiazzo Robert, Bauters Catherine, Cortet Christine,
Do Cao Christine, Wemeau Jean-Louis, Pattou François &
Vantyghem Marie-Christine
Lille University, Hospital, Lille, France.
The aim of this retrospective study was to compare the long-term evolution of
adrenal insufficiency (AI) due to bilateral adrenal surgery (S) or medical cause (M).
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Seventy AI patients (mean age 41G16 years; 60% female, similar in both groups)
were followed during a mean 6-year period (2-16); 38 were AI after bilateral
adrenalectomy (60% Cushing), 32 AI of medical origin (62% polyglandular
autoimmune syndrome). BMI, blood pressure (BP), fasting blood glucose (FBG),
cholesterol, triglycerides
(TG), metabolic therapy, cardiovascular events, AI
episodes, hospital admissions, and death were recorded at the beginning of
replacement therapy (T1) and at last news (T2).
At T1, prevalences of overweight/obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes (T2D and
mean TG level were higher in S compared to M group (P!0.01). At T2, the
prevalence of overweigh/obesity, hypertension and T2D were similar in both group
(20-34%) but TG level remained higher in S group (PZ0.01).
Between T1 and T2, 0% S patients developed hypertension and its prevalence
decreased significantly (P!0.003) from 58% (T1) to 34% (T2) while other
metabolic disorders prevalences remained the same. In M group, 22% developed
hypertension, 21% T2D and 21% dyslipidemia while the prevalence of overweight
increased significantly (P!0.005). A significantly higher weight gain in M vs.
S groups (PZ0.0006) and a greater FBG decrease in S vs. M groups (P!0.0001).
Eight patients died (1 S). Cardiovascular events were more frequent in S (10%) vs.
M (3%) groups. Acute AI (median/patient S: 0 (0-1); M 1 (0-5)) and hospital
admissions (S: 1 (0-6); M: 2 (0-5)) did not differ between the 2 groups.
Conclusion
Compared to baseline, bilateral adrenalectomy appeared safe in the long-term and
enabled significant improvement of hypertension and other metabolic disorders.
Overtime,  adrenal  insufficiency,  whatever  surgical  or  medical  origin  were
complicated with a metabolic syndrome in 20-30% of cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP6
EP7
Radiological formula for differentiating between secreting and non
secreting adrenal adenomas
Valentina Vicennati2, Elena Casadio2, Uberto Pagotto2, Guido
Di Dalmazi2,3, Eleonora Rinaldi2, Cristina Mosconi1,
Dimitris Papadopoulos1, Rita Golfieri1 & Renato Pasquali2
1Radiologic Unit, Department of Diagnostic and Preventive Medicine,
Alma Mater Studiorum-University, Bologna, Italy;2Endocrinology Unit,
Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum-
University, Bologna, Italy;3Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV,
Klinikum der Universitat, Munchen, Germany.
Introduction
Purpose of this study is to find a radiological score and to correlate radiological
characteristics  of  adrenal  adenomas  and  functional  parameters  to  predict
subclinical glucocorticoid secretion.
Methods and materials
This  retrospective  study  included
55  patients  with  adenomas,  investigated
through  CT  with  adrenal  protocol  assessing  diameters,  HU  values  of  the
unenhanced and contrast enhanced phases (enhanced-E, and 15 min delayed
enhanced-D). Patients underwent  dexamethasone  overnight  suppression test
1 mg  (DST).  Post-DST  cortisol  O50 nmol/l  identified  subclinical  cortisol
secretion.
We identified 28 subjects with typical non secreting adenomas (NSA), nine
with typical secreting adenoma (SA), 11 with atypical NSA and seven with
atypical SA.
Results
The post-DST cortisol value was significantly and positively related to mass
diameters. At univariate analyses only the two diameters were significantly
related to post-DST cortisol
(P!0.001), while at the stepwise multivariate
analysis the minimum diameter first entered the procedure (P!0.001) and E also
Z0.334;
added a significant (PZ0.027) contribution to the relationship (overall r2
P!0.001). The correlation coefficients showed that, while the minimum diameter
alone accounted for 26.8% of the variability of post-DST cortisol, the accounted
variability of post-DST cortisol increased to 33.4% after the addition of E. The
radiological  score  to  discriminate  SAs  versus  NSAs  resulted  in
0.2034!
minimum diameterC0.0378!E.
Diagnostic accuracy in differentiating SAs from NSAs was 86.0%, sensitivity
90.9% and specificity 71.8%, considering SA in patients having a score O7.21
and NSA if !7.16.
Conclusion
This study confirms the relation between adenoma’s size and glucocorticoid
secretion. It also shows that, using the predictive radiological score, a more
evident nodular pattern and a greater vascularity of the lesion corresponds to a
greater functional activity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP7
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP8
Serum but not salivary cortisol levels are influenced by daily glycemic
oscillations in type 2 diabetes
Giuseppe Bellastella1, Maria Ida Maiorino1, Annamaria De Bellis2,
Lorenzo Scappaticcio1, Katherine Esposito3 & Dario Giugliano1
1Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases Unit, Department of Medical,
Surgical, Neurological, Metabolic and Geriatric Sciences, Second
University of Naples, Naples, Italy;2Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases
Unit, Department of Cardiothoracic and Respiratory Sciences, Second
University of Naples, Naples, Italy;3Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Naples, Italy.
Diurnal salivary and plasma cortisol variations are considered valid expression of
circadian cortisol rhythmicity. The aim of this study was to assess the reliability of
salivary and plasma cortisol evaluating if glycemia and glycemic oscillations may
interfere with their concentration.
Methods
Forty-seven type 2 diabetic patients and 31 controls were studied for glycemic
profile and diurnal salivary and plasma cortisol variations on two contemporary
samples taken at 0800 and 2300 h (Late Night, LN). Glucose variability was
evaluated in diabetic patients by considering the standard deviation of blood
glucose
(BGSD)  readings,  by  calculating  the  mean  amplitude  of  glycemic
excursions (MAGEs) and continuous overlapping net glycemic action (CONGA).
Results
A significant correlation between LN serum cortisol and morning fasting glycemia
(rZ0.78; PZ0.004) was observed in T2DM group but not in the control group (rZ
0.09; PZ0.74). While LN serum cortisol significantly correlated with CONGA in
diabetic patients (rZ0.50; P!0.001), LN salivary cortisol did not correlate with
any indices of glucose variability. Moreover, a highly significant correlation
between LN salivary and LN serum cortisol concentrations was found in control
group (rZ0.80; P!0.001) but not in diabetic patients (rZ0.07; PZ0.62).
Conclusions
This study shows for the first time that late night salivary cortisol may give more
information than late night plasma cortisol on the dynamic of adrenal function of
type
2 diabetic  patients,  as  it  is  not  significantly  influenced  by  glycemic
variations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP8
EP9
The use of [131I] 6b-iodomethyl-norcholesterol scintigraphy in
evaluation of adrenal tumors
Lucyna Papierska1, Michał Rabijewski2, Anna Kamin´ ska3,
Jarosław 
´
wikła4, Maciej Otto5, Andrzej Cichocki6, Radosław Samsel6 &
Wojciech Zgliczyn´ ski1
1The Medical Centre of Postgraduate Education, Department of Endo-
crinology, Warsaw, Poland;2Medical University of Warsaw, Department of
Internal Diseases, Diabetology and Endocrinology, Warsaw, Poland;3The
Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Nuclear Medicine,
Warsaw, Poland;4University of Warmia and Mazury, The Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Department of Radiology, Olsztyn, Poland;5Medical
University of Warsaw, Department of General, Vascular and Transplant
Surgery, Warsaw, Poland;6Department of Surgery; Maria Skłodowska-
Curie, Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland.
Adrenal cortex scintigraphy has been used as early as in the 1970s, however, in
recent years, it has been a rarely performed and unappreciated examination. In
fact, this examination does not provide a perfect view on morphology of adrenal
glands, however it provides an assessment of the examined tumor’s function. The
aim of this work is to present our experience with adrenal cortex scintigraphy in
assessment of adrenal tumors.
We present a series of 50 Iodomethyl-norcholesterol (NP-59) scintigraphies. The
indications for examination were: subclinical hypercortisolemia in patients with
bilateral adrenal tumors (32 cases), primary hyperaldosteronism (eight cases),
uncertainty  in  assessment  of  cortex  function
(‘border  results’  of  hormonal
investigations) (six cases) and assessment after the surgery of adrenal cancer (four
cases). We used two different protocols, depending of assessed adrenal function
(without dexametasone if hypercortisolemia was present, with dexamethasone in
assessment of hyperaldosteronism).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Scintigraphy showed exclusive or predominant unilateral tracer uptake in 23 of 32
patients with hypercortisolemia. In all these patients after the adrenalectomy of
the dominant gland, transient secondary adrenal insufficiency was observed,
confirming the proper choice of the operating side. The scintigraphy in eight
patients with primary hyperaldosteronism showed unilateral tracer uptake in four
subjects. These patients have already been operated with clinical and biochemical
benefits.  The  other  four  patients
(tumors  without  uptake)  are  treated
pharmacologically with good results. In six patients with ‘border results’ of
hormonal investigations there was no tracer uptake after the dexamethasone, so
their tumors were classified as non-secreting and the further observation until now
confirms this statement. Finally, in one of four patients after the adrenalectomy
due to adrenal cancer scintigraphy revealed a very small fragment of adrenal
tissue, missed in the operated area.
We concluded that adrenal scintigraphy can be a useful method for functional
assessment of various adrenal tumors.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP9
EP10
Computerized tomography and magnetic resonance imaging features
for differentiating functioning adrenal lesions from non-functioning
adrenal lesions
Derya Koseoglu1, Mazhar Muslum Tuna2, Narin Nasiroglu Imga1, Bercem
Aycicek Dogan3, Mehtap Navdar Basaran4, Cagdas Senel5, Altug Tuncel5,
Dilek Berker1 & Serdar Guler1
1Ankara Numune Education and Research Hospital, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Dicle University, Faculty
of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Diyarbakir,
Turkey;3Kocaeli Darica State Hospital, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Kocaeli, Turkey;4Giresun State Hospital, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Giresun, Turkey;5Ankara Numune
Education and Research Hospital, Department of Urology, Ankara, Turkey;
6
Hitit University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Corum, Turkey.
Aim
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the characteristic features of
computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) among
functioning and non-functioning adrenal lesions.
Materials and methods
We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of patients with adrenal mass.
CT or MRI findings were available in 89 functioning and 148 non-functioning
adrenal lesions (NFAL). Of the patients with functioning adrenal mass, 34 were
diagnosed as Cushing’s syndrome, 32 as pheochromocytoma and 23 as primary
hyperaldosteronism. Patients with functioning adrenal lesions were defined as
group 1 and patients with NFAL were adopted as group 2.
Results
Patients in group 1 were younger, with a similar gender distribution. In patients
with functioning adrenal mass, adenoma size, unenhanced and early arterial phase
Hounsfield units (HU) were significantly higher compared to those with NFAL.
Patients  with  pheochromocytoma  had  significantly  larger  lesions,  higher
unenhanced  HU  levels  and  lower  washout  values  compared  with  NFAL,
Cushing’s  syndrome  and  primary  hyperaldosteronism.  Mean  early  arterial
phase HU was higher in all functioning groups compared to NFAL. The best
predictive cut-off value of early arterial phase HU for detecting functioning
adrenal mass was 27 with a specificity of 80% and sensitivity of 82.7% on ROC
curve analysis ((AUC:0.85, (95% CI 0.75-0.95)). On T1- weighted images 44.4%
of the patients with functioning adrenal lesions were hypointense, whereas 18.9%
of the patients with NFAL had hypointense lesions (P:0.02). T2-weighted images
or chemical shift sequence in phase and out phase images between functioning
and non-functioning adrenal adenomas showed no difference.
Conclusion
Our study revealed that functioning adrenal lesions might be discriminated from
NFAL using CT characteristics, and T1- weighted MRI images. Especially early
arterial phase HU, which is elevated in all functioning adrenal mass forms, can be
used effectively to distinguish functioning adrenal lesions from NFAL.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP10
EP11
ARMC5 mutation and Cushing syndrome due to bilateral
macronodular adrenal hyperplasia - case report
Maria Manuel Costa1,2, Joana Oliveira1,2, Jose Luis Castedo1,2,
Joao Magalhães3 & Davide Carvalho1,2
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism of Centro
Hospitalar de São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Department of Pathology of Centro Hospitalar de
Sa˜o João, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Bilateral  macronodular  adrenal  hyperplasia  ACTH-independent
(BMAH)
represents less than 1% of the causes of Cushing’s syndrome (CS). Studies
have shown that mutations in the gene ARMC5 are a common cause of family
BMAH and are associated with severe clinical disease and the development of
meningiomas.
Case report
64-years-old man presented to our consult due to bilateral macronodular adrenal
hyperplasia. He had diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia and
coronary heart disease. The physical exame showed excess weight (weight 81 kg,
height 1.65 m, BMI 29.7 kg/m2), bruising, facial rubeosis, skin atrophy and
deposition  of  cervical  dorsal  fat.  Laboratory  work  up  revealed  ACTH-
independent  CS:  ACTH!1 ng/l
(ref.v.!63.3),  serum  cortisol  after
1 mg
dexamethasone  suppression  test
27.6 mg/dl,  urinary  free  cortisol
(UFC)
520 mg/dl (ref.v. 36-137) and serum cortisol after low-dose dexamethasone test
24 mg/dl. He underwent research of ectopic adrenal hormone receptors with
positive response (under b-blocker and angiotensin receptor antagonists) and
partial (after discontinuation of these drugs) in the posture test and negative
response to the others tests. The patient would be subjected to adrenalectomy, but
due a complication during surgery, he performed just right adrenalectomy.
Histological results confirm macronodular adrenal hyperplasia. Genetic study was
preformed  and  a  ARMC5
mutation  in  heterozygosity
(c.1379TOC)  was
identified in adrenal and blood. Patient is currently with no evidence of CS:
UFC  36.3 mg/dl,  salivar  cortisol
0.180
and
0.193 mg/dl
(ref.v.!0.32)  and
ACTH!1 ng/l). Cerebral CT performed showed left posterior temporal calcified
lesion, placing the hypothesis of meningioma.
Conclusion
Genotyping of ARMC5 gene has important clinical implications in counseling the
patient and family: the presence of the mutation helps identify patients at risk of
developing CS and other related injuries, allowing early diagnosis and treatment.
There are cases described of CS remission after unilateral adrenalectomy, so we
opted for medical surveillance of the patient.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP11
EP12
Nonfunctional adrenal incidentalomas and cardiometabolic risk
Lia Ferreira & Isabel Palma
Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Background
Incidentally  discovered  adrenal  tumours  have  become  a  common  clinical
problem. The presence of an adrenal incidentalomas has been associated with
an increase incidence of several cardiovascular risk factors. These abnormalities
are more frequent in patients with clinical and subclinical hypercortisolism,
nevertheless some studies have reported an association between nonfunctioning
adrenal incidentalomas (NFAIs) with increased insulin resistance and cardiovas-
cular risk.
Aim
The aim of the study was to identify features of cardiometabolic risk in patients
with NFAIs.
Material and methods
Fifty-one patients with adrenal incidentaloma and negative screening testes to
rule out catecholamine, mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid overproduction
were included in the study. Retrospective analysis based on clinical parameters
and results of imaging and laboratory procedures was conducted. Features such as
BMI, hypertension, abnormal parameters of glucose and lipid metabolism were
assessed.  Cardiovascular  risk  was  estimated  with  SCORE
(The  European
Systematic Coronary Risk Evaluation).
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
We investigated 51 patients with NFAIs (67% were females) with mean age of
61G10 years. The mean adrenal mass size was 21.5G9.3 mm; 30% had bilateral
incidentalomas.
Excessive body mass was observed in about 66% of patients: 38.3% were
overweight and 27.7% obese. Hypertension was observed in 60% of patients.
Type 2 diabetes was diagnosed in 29.4%, impaired fasting glucose in 27.5% cases
and median HOMA-IR was 4.3. SCORE system classified as low risk 3.9% of
patients, moderate risk 41.2%, high risk 15.7% and very high risk 39.2%. Among
patients with low or moderate risk 56.5% had LDL-c levels above 115 mg/dl;
62.5% of patients with high risk had LDL-c higher than 100 mg/dl and all patients
with very high risk had LDL-c over 70 mg/dl.
Conclusion
Patients with NFAIs have high cardiometabolic risk. Cardiovascular features
should be screened during their initial workup and follow-up to identify those at
risk and implement the appropriate interventions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP12
EP13
Immunohistochemical characteristics of blood vessels in non-visualized
and visualized on MRI pituitary adenomas in patients with Cushing’s
disease (pilot study)
Iya Voronkova, Zhanna Belaya, Patimat Khandaeva,
Liudmila Rozhinskaya, Alexander Vorontsov, Ivan Sitkin,
Andrey Grigoriev & Galina Melnichenko
The National Research Centre for Endocrinology, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Regardless of improvements in MRI, up to 20% of ACTH-secreting pituitary
tumors are only identified at surgical exploration. The objective was to estimate
whether there is any difference in blood vessels and the subsequent ability to
uptake  contrast  agent  in  visualized  micro-adenomas  as  compared  to  non-
visualized on MRI ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors.
Materials and methods
Retrospective evaluation of ACTH-positive pituitary tumors from patients with
Cushing’s disease (nZ24) with either non-visualized pituitary tumor on MRI
(nZ7) or pituitary tumor less then 10 mm (nZ17). Cushing’s disease was
confirmed by histological evaluation in all enrolled subjects. Selected tumors
were treated immunohistochemically with antibodies to the following antigens:
CD34 (clone QBEnd/10, RTU, Leica) or CD 31(clone 1A10, RTU, Leica), D2-40
(clone D2-40, RTU, Dako). A biotin-free Bond Polymer Refine Detection system
(Leica) was used according to standard protocols with the automated system Bond
max (Leica). The investigators were not aware of the diagnosis before performing
the micro vessel counting. The representative field !200 magnifications were
chosen for each tumor. These fields were digitized as JPEG images using a digital
camera system (Leica, DFC 490). Image-processing software (Leica Application
suite V3). We calculated the density of micro vessels and measured the diameter
of larger and smaller vessel.
Results
The density of blood vessels were not different in subject with visualized Me-112
(Q25-Q75
95-136)  and  non-visualized
117
(56-138)  pituitary  adenomas.
However the shape and diameter of these vessels differ: the largest of visible
vessels tend to be larger in patients with non-visualized pituitary adenomas 65 mm
(41-93) vs 35 mm (25-66) PZ0.06; the diameter of medium vessels were
significantly higher in subjects with non-visualized adenoma 16.0 mm (13.5-30.0)
vs 12.5 mm (11.7-14.2) PZ0.028, the diameter of small vessels were not different
7.0 mm (5.0-9.5) vs 7.0 mm (6.0-9.3). In six cases, the vessels were slit-shaped
and five of these cases were patients with visualized pituitary adenomas on MRI.
Conclusions
The larger diameter of blood vessels in subjects with non-visualized pituitary
adenomas might influence the contrast agent uptake and its retention making the
pituitary adenoma tissue less different from normal pituitary.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP13
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP14
Adrenal crisis and sick day episodes among CAH patients:
preliminary report based on international CAH (I-CAH) registry
Nayananjani Karunasena1, Eleni Daniel1, Jillian Bryce2, Jipu Jiang2,
S Faisal Ahmed2, Tulay Guran3, Berenice B Mendonca4, Tania A Bachega4,
Oliver Blankenstein5, Birgit Koehler5, Uta Neumann5, Carlo Acerini6,
Nils Krone7, Walter Bonfig8, Klaus Mohnike9, Heba Elsedfy10 &
Richard Ross1
1Academic Unit of Endocrinology, Department of Oncology and Metab-
olism, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK;2School of Medicine, MVLS,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK;3Paediatric Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;4Department of
Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil;5Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany;6Department
of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK;7Birmingham
Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, UK;8Munich Technical University,
Munich, Germany;9Otto-von-Guericke Universitat, Magdeburg, Germany;
10Endocrinology Unit, Paediatrics Department, Ain Shams University,
Cairo, Egypt.
Background
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a rare condition that is associated with
life long risk of adrenal crisis. Management of CAH demands a fine balance
between  excess  glucocorticoid  leading  to  adverse  effects  and  too  little
glucocorticoid risking adrenal crises. Frequent occurrence of sick day episodes
warrants dose adjustment and education regarding adrenal crisis. In a condition
such as CAH it is difficult to collect sufficient data from small cohorts at a single
center level to establish clinical significance. To address this issue we have used
the I-CAH registry to investigate the frequency of sick day episodes and adrenal
crisis.
Methodology
The I-CAH registry is a part of the I-DSD registry, which has national ethics
approval as a pseudoanonymized registry in the UK for which patients provide
consent for  curation  of  routine  clinical  data.  We  have  built a  prospective
longitudinal module in the registry and collected data on number and duration of
sick day episodes, history of adrenal crisis and change in medications since last
visit.
Results
Amongst the 2012 cases, in the I-DSD/CAH Registry, there were 504 records of
CAH (nZ490 21-OHD and nZ14 11-b hydroxylase deficiency) and data were
accessible in 389 (nZ377 21-OHD, nZ12 11-b hydroxylase deficiency). Data
were entered from 13 countries. There were 163 adult patients (O18 years) and
226 children (!18 years). There were 52 patients with longitudinal data and the
recorded number of sick day episodes was 36. Duration of Sick day episodes
ranged between 1-10 days and mean duration of an episode was 2.5 days. There
were no reported adrenal crises. Dose of medication was changed based on the
sick day episodes.
Conclusion
The I-CAH registry provides a tool to look at adverse events in patients with
CAH. Preliminary data suggest that patients experience frequent episodes where
they evoke the sick day rules.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP14
EP15
Impact of the chemokine receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7 on metastatic
potential and survival in adrenocortical carcinoma
Irina Chifu, Carmina Fuß, Cristina Ronchi, Katja Marienfeld,
Martin Fassnacht, Stefanie Hahner & Britta Heinze
Endocrine and Diabetes Unit, Department of Internal Medicine I, University
Hospital of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
Background
The  chemokine  receptor  CXCR4
and  its  associate  receptor  CXCR7,  that
modulates CXCR4 function, have been associated with tumor progression and
metastasis in human cancers. In ACC, Ki67 index and ENSAT stage are the most
important prognostic parameters.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Objective
To assess expression of CXCR4 and CXCR7 in adrenal cancer and correlate
results with clinical outcome.
Methods
CR expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry in paraffin-embedded
sections of 215 ACC tissues (174 primary tumors (PT), 18 local recurrences (LR),
23 metastases (M)). 47.4% (nZ102) of patients had an initial R0 resection status.
Data were correlated with metastatic status, tumor progress and survival.
Results
Staining for CXCR4 and CXCR7 was found in 85% and 82% of investigated
tumors, respectively (h-score O1 in 48 and 50%). No differences were observed
regarding CR staining between PT, LR and M. Patients with initial R0 resection
status and a positive CXCR4 membrane staining tended to more frequently
develop metastases at follow up (59 vs 41%; PZ0.075). However, for the whole
patient group, no significant correlation was observed between clinicopatholo-
gical data and membrane staining of the CR, with neither of the CR being an
independent factor of overall and progression-free survival. In contrast, strong
cytoplasmic CXCR4 staining appeared to be associated with a better overall
survival in multivariate analysis (130 vs 49 months, RR 0.55, PZ0.046). Among
the subgroup of cases with a low ENSAT stage (I and II), a strong CXCR7
membrane staining described a trend towards a better overall survival (77 vs 41
months; PZ0.077).
Conclusion
Different from other malignancies, CXCR4 and CXCR7 membrane staining did
not significantly influence prognosis in ACC. The observation of improved
outcome in patients with strong cytoplasmic CXCR4 staining remains to be
assessed in further studies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP15
EP16
Adrenal function recovery after adrenalectomy in Cushing syndrome
Lidia Radomir1, Daniel Mihai1, Andra Caragheorgheopol1,
Victor Tomulescu2 & Corin Badiu1,2
1National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2C.Davila
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Background
First-line  therapy  of  ACTH-independent  Cushing’s  Syndrome
(CS)  is  the
resection of the underlying tumor in all cases. After surgical cure of CS, most
patients develop transient secondary adrenal insufficiency with a variable time of
recovery.  Adrenal  function  testing  can  identify  patients  who  may  require
glucocorticoid replacement.
Methods
We reviewed 61 patients diagnosed with ACTH-independent CS excluding 6 with
adrenocortical carcinoma; 40 underwent unilateral adrenalectomy for adrenocor-
tical adenoma or bilateral macronodular hyperplasia. Postoperatively, blood was
sampled for plasma cortisol levels at 08:00AM; 4 hours and 24 hours after
administration of 1 mg Synacthen depot im. Glucocorticoid replacement was
started if basal plasma cortisol!5 mg/dl, or a stimulated plasma cortisol!
20 mg/dl. Follow up was performed at 3, 6, 9 months and 1 year or more in
selected  cases,  in order to see  the duration  of glucocorticoid replacement,
morphological aspect of the contralateral adrenal and complications remission.
Results
Between 2005-2015, 55 patients were diagnosed with benign ACTH-independent
CS in our clinical department, 7 men and 48 women, aged 52G11.68 (range
26-76): 43 adenomas and 12 bilateral macronodular hyperplasia. Tumor size
ranged from 16 to 140 mm (39G20.2 mm). Subclinical Cushing (pathological
dexamethasone test only) was diagnosed in 29 cases and overt Cushing in 26
cases. Mixed glucocorticoid and androgen secretion was found in four cases.
From all cases, forty underwent unilateral adrenalectomy; six patients were
excluded because of missing data. From the remaining 34 patients, 18 were with
secondary adrenal insufficiency (15 with overt CS and 3 with subclinical CS),
receiving replacement therapy 3-18 months after surgery. The decision of ceasing
therapy was based on a stimulated cortisol S20 mg/dl. A longer period of
substitution was required for those patients with atrophic contralateral adrenal at
initial morphological evaluation.
Conclusion
Only about a half of the patients with CS develop postoperatively secondary
adrenal insufficiency. The synacthen depot test is useful for the decision of
starting or ceasing the replacement therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP16
EP17
Psychopathology, memory and quality of life in Cushing’s syndrome
Alicia Santos1, Eugenia Resmini1, Iris Crespo1, Elena Valassi1, Maria
Antonia Martínez2, Patricia Pires3 & Susan Webb1
1Departments, Hospital Sant Pau, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBER-ER, Unidad 747), IIB-Sant Pau, ISCIII
and Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain;2Escola
Universitària d’Infermeria, Hospital de Sant Pau. Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain;3INNDACYT, Avda. Europa, 20,
Planta Baja Puerta D 08907, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction
Cushing’s  syndrome
(CS)  has  been  related  to  higher  psychopathology.
Psychopathology can be related to poor memory performance, and low quality
of life. The aim of this study is to establish the relationship between the three
parameters and with subjective symptom perception in CS.
Methods/design
Thirty six patients in remission of CS and 36 matched controls for age, sex and
education  years  were  included  in  the  study.  They  completed SCL-90R,
CushingQoL (only patients), Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure, a symptom list
ranging from 0 to 10 and performed blood tests.
Results
Patients  showed  more  psychopathology  in  all  the  SCL-90R  variables
(somatization,  obsessive-compulsive,  interpersonal  sensitivity,  depression,
anxiety, hostility, phobic anxiety, paranoid ideation, psychoticism, global severity
index, positive symptom distress index and positive symptom total) (P!0.01)
and poorer long-term memory performance (PZ0.024), compared to controls.
They also reported more symptoms than controls (P!0.001). Psychopathology
did not correlate with memory performance, quality of life or symptoms. The
hostility subscale was positively correlated to blood cortisol levels (rZ0.459,
PZ0.005).
Conclusion
CS patients after endocrine control show more psychopathology and memory
impairment than healthy controls. These data show that despite normalization of
hypercortisolism psychological morbidity persists.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP17
EP18
Carotid intima-media thickness as the cardiometabolic risk indicator in
patients with nonfunctional adrenal mass and metabolic syndrome
screening
Gamze Akkus1, Tamer Tetiker1, Ali Deniz2, Mehtap Evran1 & Murat Sert1
1Cukurova University Endocrinology Department, Adana, Turkey;
2Cukurova University Cardiology Department, Adana, Turkey.
Objective
Nonfunctional adrenal masses are a risk indicator of increased cardiometabolic
risk. Especially; increased thrombogenic ambient, insulin resistance, hepatostea-
tosis and abdominal obesity are determined in these patients with nonfunctional
adrenal  masses.  Our  purpose  was  to  show  the  association  of  adrenal
incidentalome and metabolic syndrome in consideration of the studies and to
detect the increase in the carotid intima-media thickness which is regarded as the
precessor of atherosclerosis.
Material and methods
Eighty one patients who applied to our clinic between 2014 and 2016 were
diagnosed with adrenal mass and follow-ups were included in the study. During
the  first  application  from  the  patients,  their  height/weight,  BMI,  waist
circumference  and  tension  arterial  were  measured.  Participants  underwent
hormonal evaluation and insulin rezistance with the HOMA-IR. A 1-mg DST
test was conducted after evaluating basal cortisol measurements of the patients.
After the existence of adrenal mass of the patients was verified with MRG, the
patients were classified into two groups: the patients with mass size !3 cm (K1)
and  the  patients  with  mass  size  of  at  least
3 cm  (K2).  Lastly,  detailed
echocardiography (tissue Doppler and diastolic dysfunction parameters) and
carotid intima-media of the patients were measured using B-mode ultrasound.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
The control group (nZ33) was created by choosing healthy volunteers who
applied to our polyclinic. While choosing the control group, it was targeted that
age, gender distribution, and BMI values of the control group would equal those
of the patient group.
Findings
Within the scope of the study, mean mass size of the patients (nZ81) with adrenal
mass was determined to be 2.5G1.2 cm. Mass size of 64.19% (nZ52, K1) of the
patients was found as !3 cm, while mass size of the remainder (35.81%)
(nZ29, K2) was calculated to be at least 3 cm. As a result of the analyses, five of
the  patients  with  adrenal  mass  were  detected  to  have  subclinical  Cushing
syndrome. The remaining 76 patients were accepted as nonfunctional. It was seen
with  regard  to  metabolic  and  biochemical  parameters  that  plasma  glucose
(PZ0.01), insulin (PZ0.00) and triglyceride (PZ0.012) values of NFAİ and
SCS patients were significantly high compared to those of the control group.
It was detected that measured heart rate (PZ0.00), end-diastolic diameter (ED
¸)
(PZ0.02), end-systolic diameter (ES
¸)
(PZ0.014) and carotid intima-media
thickness (CIMT)(PZ0.00) values of the patients with adrenal mass (nZ81)
were significantly higher than those of the healthy control group.
Result
We see the increased insulin resistance, increased risk of cardiovascular disease
with  the  increase  in  the  thickness  of  carotid  intima-media  and  diastolic
disfunction parameters, although the patients with adrenal incidentaloma are
nonfunctional.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP18
EP19
Are adrenal incidentalomas components of metabolic syndrome?
Elzbieta Bandurska Stankiewicz1, Katarzyna Myszka-Podgórska1,
Joanna Rutkowska1, Wojciech Matuszewski1 & Rakesh Jalali2
1
Endocrinology and Diabetology Clinic, Provincial Specialist Hospital in
Olszyn, Olsztyn, Poland;2Emergency Department, Regional Specialist
Hospital in Olsztyn, Olsztyn, Poland.
Introduction
The aim of the study was to asses frequency of the components of metabolic
syndrome (MS) according to the criteria of the International Diabetes Federation
(IDF) in patients with adrenal incidentaloma (AI) without hormonal activity.
Design
The study comprised of patients with AI without hormonal activity, confirmed
in CT. The adrenal function was determined by measuring circadian rhythm of
cortisol and/or dexametasone suppression test, aldosterone, plasma renin activity
(PRA),  DHEAS,  androstenedione,  metanephrines  in  urine.  The  physical
examination  of  the  patients  included  BMI,  the  waist  circumference,  blood
pressure.  The  biochemical  assays:  OGTT,  fasting  insulin  and  lipids
(total
cholesterol, HDL, LDL, triglycerides). HOMA IR was also calculated. MS was
diagnosed according to the IDF criteria.
Results
We examined 125 patients, mean age: 61.3G8.8 years, 72 (42.4%) were men.
Tumor mean size: 27.6G15 mm. MS was diagnosed in 53 (42.4%) patients, 24
(19.2%) men. Abdominal obesity was diagnosed in 87 (69.6%) patients- 31
(24.8%) men. Total cholesterol was 218G49.7 mg/dl, HDL 59G21.1 mg/dl,
LDL 134G44.1 mg/dl, triglycerides 116G60 mg/dl. 83 (66.6%) patients had
dyslipidemia. In 99 (79.2%) patients hypertension was diagnosed, with the mean
arterial systolic BP 131G15 mmHg, and diastolic PB 80G9 mmHg. Dysglyce-
mia was observed in 62 (49.6%) patients aged: 62.9G7.5 years- 30 (24%) men.
IFG was recognized in 24 (19.2%); IGT in 34 (27.6%), diabetes in 16 (13%)
patients. Mean HOMA IR was 2.3G2.0 (mmol/l!uU/ml); in 78.4% (99 patients)
we diagnosed insulin resistance (HOMA IR O1).
Conclusions
(1) In patients with AI without hormonal activity according to the IDF criteria MS
was diagnosed in 42.4%.
(2) Patients with AI without hormonal activity are a risk group of prediabetes and
diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP19
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP20
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia- “natural history of the disease” - very
late diagnosis in a series of patients
Urszula Ambroziak1, Anna Kępczyn´ ska-Nyk1, Maja Lenkiewicz-Sidor1,
Krystian JaŻdŻewski2,3, Ewa Małunowicz4 & Tomasz Bednarczuk1
1Department of Internal Medicine and Endocrinology, Medical University
of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland;2Genomic Medicine, Medical University of
Warsaw;3Laboratory of Human Cancer Genetics, Centre of New
Technologies, CENT, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland;4Department
of Biochemistry, Radioimmunology and Experimental Medicine, Children’s
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Background
Classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is diagnosed mainly in newborns.
While patients with salt wasting form cannot survive without timely diagnosis,
those with simple virilizing or nonclassical may be diagnosed even in advanced age.
Aim
To present clinical, biochemical, radiological and genetic characteristics of series
of CAH patients diagnosed in advanced adulthood.
Material and methods
Eight patients (FZ5, MZ3) with adult diagnosis of CAH were qualified to
the  analysis.  CAH  was  diagnosed  based  on  urine  steroid  profile  made  by
GC/MS-SIM. Clinical data consisted of antropometric measurement, metabolic
and hormonal assessment, adrenal CT/MR imaging, testicular ultrasound and
semen analysis in men. Genetic analysis was made by direct sequencing of
CYP21A2 gene.
Results
Women’s age at CAH diagnosis was 18-65 yrs (three were over 30), men’s
32-52 yr.  Women  were  seeking  endocrine  consultation  because  of  primary
amenorrhea,  clinical  hyperandrogenism,  adrenal  incidentaloma  and  clinical
suspicion of hypercorstisolism. Men were admitted for a diagnostic work-up of
adrenal  incidentaloma,  one  with  suspicion  of  ACTH-  dependent  Cushing’s
syndrome. 3/5 women and all men had partial cortisol deficiency. Beside one men,
none presented in past with adrenal crisis. 4/5 females were virgo, 3-had primary
amenorrhea, 4/5 had pronounced hirsutism, one presented with acne and 2 with
alopecia. All men were complaining on slight libido decrease. All patients had
short stature. BMI- among women was 20-40.6 kg/m2, in men 33.6-33.7. All
patients  presented  with  insulin  resistance,  one  man  with  diabetes.  Mean
testosterone  level in  females was
10.25
(1.97-27.9) nmol/l, androstendione-
10.02
(4.4-14.1) ng/ml. All men were diagnosed with biochemical hypogonado-
tropic hypogonadism. In the oldest men TART’s were found, while in others no
abnormalities in testes were seen. Adrenal tumors or hypertrophy was found in all
three men and in 3/5 women.
Conclusion
The  diagnosis  of  classical  CAH  in  advanced  age  is  possible.  Males  with
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, adrenal tumors and short stature should be
evaluated towards CAH. The assessment of cortisol reserve in manadatory in case
of  adrenal  incidentaloma,  elevated  ACTH  level  and  no  clinical  data  for
hypercortisolism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP20
EP21
Long-term metabolic evolution of a cohort of patients treated for
adrenal insufficiency
Moutarde Coralie, Douillard Claire, Bauters Catherine, Cortet Christine,
Do Cao Christine, Leclerc Laurence, Merlen Emilie, Pigny Pascal,
Wemeau Jean-Louis & Vantyghem Marie-Christine
Lille University Hospital, Lille, France.
The aim of this retrospective study was to compare the long-term metabolic
evolution of a cohort of patients treated for adrenal insufficiency (AI), and the best
biological parameters of a good balance.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Seventy patients with AI (mean age 41 years (G16); 60% female) were followed
during a median 6-year period (2-16 years): 38 after bilateral adrenalectomy
(60%  Cushing)  and
32
after  AI  of  medical  origin
(62%  polyglandular
autoimmune  syndrome).  BMI,  blood  pressure
(BP),  fasting  blood  glucose
(FBG), cholesterol, triglycerides, ionogram, plasma renin activity, ACTH before
and 2 h after hydrocortisone intake, daily hydro- and fludro-cortisone were
recorded at the beginning of replacement therapy (T1) and at last news (T2).
At T2 vs T1, the prevalence of overweight was 35% vs 17% (P!0.02), obesity
18% vs 22% (non significant; NS), hypertension 29% vs 31% (NS), dyslipidemia
26% vs 17% (PZ0.058) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) 21% vs 8. Between T1 and T2,
IMC (P!0.02) and FBG (P!0.0001) medians increased.
PRA levels were inversely correlated with T1 (p1Z0.002) and T2 (p2Z0.0001)
natremia and positively correlated with kalemia (p1Z0.07; p2Z0.04) without any
relation with fludrocortisone dose or BP. In contrast, fludrocortisone doses were
positively correlated with T2 systolic BP (PZ0.03) with a trend for natremia
(PZ0.08). T1 ACTH levels were significantly correlated with natremia (PZ0.004).
ACTH levels 2 h after hydrocortisone intake were not influenced by hydrocortisone
doses. In contrast, hydrocortisone doses were correlated with diastolic BP (p1Z0.02;
p2Z0.006), T2 FBG (PZ0.03), with a trend for BMI (p1Z0.09; p2Z0.07).
Hydrocortisone doses/kg of body weight were higher in case of T2D (P!0.03).
Conclusion: weight and T2D increased significantly during the follow-up, in relation
with hydrocortisone dose. Both hydro and fludrocortisone doses control BP.
Hormonal measurements (PRA, ACTH.) do not bring more than BP and ionogram
to the quality of replacement therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP21
EP22
Method-specific serum cortisol responses to the ACTH test: comparison of two
generations of Roche automated immunoassays using polyclonal vs MABs
Marianne Klose1, Linda Hilsted2 & Ulla Feldt-Rasmussen1
1Department of Endocinology, Copenhagen University Hosital, Rigshospi-
talet, Copenhagen, Denmark;2Department of Clinical Biochemistry,
Copenhagen University Hosital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction
The plasma cortisol response to the ACTH test is known to vary significantly by
assays. An automated cortisol immunoassays with increased specificity due to the
shift from polyclonal to MABs, and standardized against mass spectrometry was
recently introduced, with an expected decrease in cortisol concentrations by 20%.
Cut-offs used in clinical practice for patient evaluation will thus have to be
adjusted. We aimed to assess the normal cortisol response to ACTH stimulation
measured by Elecsys Cortisol II.
Methods
An ACTH test (250 mg i.v. ACTH1-24) was undertaken in 100 healthy volunteers
(age, 18-70 years; 50 women) and 13 women on oral contraceptives. Serum
cortisol was measured by two commercially available immunoassays: Elecsys
Cortisol (polyclonal Ab)(Roche) and Elecsys Cortisol II (MAB). The estimated
lower reference limit for the 30 min cortisol response to ACTH was derived from
the 2.5th percentile of log-transformed concentrations.
Results
Cortisol concentrations measured by Elecsys Cortisol II were approximately 20%
lower relative to Elecsys Cortisol. The 30 min cortisol response was normally
distributed in males but not in females, with no significant gender difference at
baseline nor post-ACTH (PZ0.1). The lower reference limit for the 30 min
cortisol response was method-specific; Elecsys Cortisol (range: 534-1013; lower
reference limit:
572 nmol/l) and Elecsys Cortisol II (range: 399-817; lower
reference limit: 432 nmol/l), and remained significantly elevated by both methods
in women on oral contraceptives.
Conclusion
The cutoff defining a normal 30 min. cortisol response to the ACTH test is
influenced significantly by assay employed as well as oestrogen treatment. New
cutoffs  should  be  introduced  with  the  introduction  of  new  generation
immunoassays with higher specificity
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP22
EP23
Ascending aorta dilatation in primary aldosteronism: a new deleterious
consequence of aldosterone excess
Valentina Vicennati1, Guido Zavatta1, Uberto Pagotto1, Elena Casadio1,
Guido Di Dalmazi2, Rinaldi Eleonora1 & Renato Pasquali1
1Endocrinology Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma
Mater Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy;2Medizinische
Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universitat Munchen, Munchen,
Germany.
Introduction
Primary aldosteronism (PA) features a higher prevalence of cardiovascular events and
renal  complications  as  compared  with essential  hypertension.  The  effects  of
aldosterone excess on ascending aorta have never been investigated in human subjects.
Methods
From August 2014 to December 2015, we enrolled forty-seven consecutive PA
outpatients who had not undergone surgery of the adrenal mass. Hypercortisolism
and pheochromocytoma were excluded. All patients were ordered a trans-thoracic
echocardiogram. Besides, an echocardiogram was requested to study forty-five
consecutive hypertensive outpatients (at least on one antihypertensive drug) with an
adrenal mass, after ruling out PA. They were considered essential hypertensive (EH)
controls.  Adrenal  masses  were  studied  in  both  groups  with:
2-hour-upright-
Aldosterone-to-Renin-Ratio (ARR) and, if positive, Captopril Challenge Test, the
1 mg dexamethasone suppression test, and 24-hour-acidified urinary metanephrines.
We considered the presence of ascending aorta dilatation, which was defined as
having an aortic root diameter higher than 37 mm and/or a tubular ascending aorta
diameter superior to 36 mm.
Results
Forty-seven cases of PA and forty-five EH controls were assessed. In each group, the
male-to-female ratio was 27/20 and 21/24, respectively. The groups did not differ in
BMI, hypertensive cardiomyopathy, smoking history, adrenal morphology and
creatinine. Ascending aorta dilatation was significantly higher in PA compared to EH
controls, independently of age (36.2% vs 11.1%; odds-ratioZ4.614, 95% CI 1.33-
15.97; PZ0.007). The difference was still significant when comparing males of either
group (51.9% vs 19.0%; odds-ratio 4.577, 95% CI 1.22-17.22; PZ0.034), whereas
in females significance was not achieved.
Conclusion
Ascending aorta dilatation is more prevalent in males with PA than in EH controls,
while in females with PA it is a rarer manifestation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP23
EP24
Identified mutations in CYP11B1 gene in two Tunisian patients
with 11-beta hydroxylase deficiency
Houda Ennaifer1, Ines Kammoun1, M Kharrat2, Nessrine Cheikrouhou1,
Maria Khatib1, M Trabelsi3 & Claude Ben Slama1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, National Institute of
Nutrition, Tunis, Tunisia;2Laboratory of Human Genetics, University of
medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia;3Department of Congenital and
Hereditary Diseases, Charles-Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
11b-Hydroxylase deficiency (11b-OHD), caused by CYP11B1 mutations, is
characterized by hyporeninemic, hypokalemic hypertension and hyperandrogen-
ism. We studied the mutations of CYP11B1 gene in two patients with classic
11b-OHD.
Observations
We present the first case of a 23 year old boy with preliminary diagnosis of 21
b-OHD diagnosed at the age of 10. The patient presented with hypertension and
hypokalemia which were against the diagnosis of 21 b-OHD. The physical
examination showed microgenitalia with no palpable gonads. The patient’s
karyotype  was
46
XX.  Cortisol  level  was  normal.  Deoxycorticosterone,
corticosterone, DHEA and 17OH-progesterone were markedly elevated. The
hypothesis of 11b-OHD deficiency was considered and confirmed by genetic
exploration. A non-sense mutation 6379V of the CYP11 gene was found. The
patient was referred to an experienced surgeon for micropenis.
The second case is about a 9 year old girl who was diagnosed at birth with a
disorder of sexual differentiation 46 XX, without signs of salt loss. The patient
had a feminizing surgery at the age of 6 months and she was treated par
hydrocortisone. When she was 6 year old, she presented with hyperandrogenism,
male behavior, hypertension and severe hypokalemia. Deoxycorticosterone and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
17OH-progesterone  were  markedly  elevated.  The  hypothesis  of
11b-OHD
deficiency was considered and confirmed by genetic exploration. A non-sense
mutation p.G379V of the CYP11B1 gene was found.
Conclusions
Our cases show the importance of the early etiologic investigation in children
with disorder of sexual differentiation. Medical and psychological management
are necessary to improve the prognosis of these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP24
EP25
Low positive predictive value of midnight salivary cortisol
measurement to detect hypercortisolism in type 2 diabetes
Charlotte Steffensen1,5, Henrik Holm Thomsen1,2,5, Olaf M Dekkers3,4,5,
Jens S Christiansen1,5, Jørgen Rungby5,6 & Jens Otto L Jørgensen1,5
1Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark;2Department of Medicine,
Viborg Regional Hospital, Viborg, Denmark;3Department of Medicine,
Section Endocrinology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands;4Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark;5Department of Clinical Epidemiology,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands;6Centre for
Diabetes Research, Gentofte University Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark.
Background
Hypercortisolism is prevalent in type
2 diabetes
(T2D), but analytical and
functional uncertainties prevail. Measurement of salivary cortisol is considered an
expedient screening method for hypercortisolism, but its usefulness in the context
of T2D is uncertain.
Aim
To  compare  late  night  salivary  cortisol
(LNSC)  with  the  1  mg  overnight
dexamethasone  suppression  test
(DST),  which  was  considered
‘reference
standard’, in T2D.
Patients and methods
382 unselected and recently diagnosed T2D patients underwent assessment of
LNSC and DST, and the test outcome was related to age, gender, BMI and
Hemoglobin  A1C  levels.  We  used  the  following  cut-off  values:  LNSC
%3.6 nmol/l and DST %50 nmol/l.
Results
The meanGS.E.M. levels of LNSC and DST were 7.3G0.25 nmol/l and 28.7G
1.4 nmol/l, respectively. Hypercortisolim was present in 85.6% based on LNSC
values and 22% based on DST. LNSC, as compared to DST, had the following
test characteristics: sensitivity: 84.5% (95%CI: 75.0-91.5%), specificity: 14.1%
(95%CI: 10.4-18.6%), positive predictive value: 21.7% (95%CI: 17.4-26.6%),
negative predictive value: 76.4% (95%CI: 63.0-86.8%) and overall accuracy
29.6% (95%CI: 25.0-34.4%). LNSC and DST values were not associated with
Hemoglobin A1C, BMI and age in this diabetes cohort.
Conclusion
The LNSC is characterized by very low specificity and poor positive predictive
value as compared to the DST, resulting in an overall low accuracy. Further
methodological and clinical studies are needed to substantiate the relevance of
cortisol status in T2D.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP25
EP26
Glucocorticoid axis in patients with primary aldosteronism
Raluca Trifanescu1,2, Alexandra Smarandoiu2, Andra Caragheorgheopol2,
Sorina Schipor2, Anda Dumitrascu2 & Catalina Poiana1,2
1“Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest,
Romania;2“C.I. Parhon” National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest,
Romania.
Introduction
Primary aldosteronism is associated with increased prevalence of cardiometabolic
complications. The mechanisms are not fully elucidated, but an association with
autonomous cortisol secretion could increase vascular and metabolic risk.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Aims
To assess glucocorticoid axis in patients with primary aldosteronism as compared
to patients with ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome and control hypertensive
patients without gluco or mineralocorticoid excess.
Patients and methods
Twenty two patients (10M/12F, aged 43.9G11.2 years) with primary aldosteron-
ism- PA (14 adrenal tumors, 8 uni/bilateral adrenal hyperplasia), 13 patients
(2M/11F, aged 43.8G13.3 years) with ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome
and 42 control hypertensive patients (16M/26F, aged 35.8G14.5 years) were
retrospectively  reviewed.  Plasma  aldosterone  and  plasma  direct  renin  were
measured by chemiluminescence (method’s sensitivity 2.2 ng/dl for aldosterone
and 0.27 ng/dl for renin, respectively); serum cortisol and ACTH were measured
by electrochemiluminescence.
Results
BMI, maximum systolic blood pressure, fasting glycaemia and total cholesterol
were similar in the three groups. Serum potassium levels in patients with PA
(2.6G0.5 mmol/l)  were  significantly  lower  than  in  patients  with  ACTH
independent Cushing syndrome (4.3G0.9 mmol/l, P!0.0001) and in control
patients (4.4G0.4 mmol/l, P!0.0001). Midnight (11 p.m.) serum cortisol in PA
patients (4.9G3.1 mg/dl) was significantly lower than in patients with ACTH-
independent Cushing syndrome (10.4G3 mg/dl, PZ0.007), and similar with
control patients (3.2G2.7 mg/dl, PZ0.17). Median serum 8 a.m. cortisol after
1 mg  low-dose  dexamethasone  suppression  test
(LDDST)  in  PA  patients
(1.34 mg/dl) was significantly lower than in patients with ACTH-independent
Cushing syndrome (12.3 mg/dl, P!0.0001), but significantly higher than in
control patients (0.84 mg/dl, PZ0.001). ACTH levels were similar in PA patients
and in control group. One operated patient with PA developed postoperative
adrenal insufficiency and required glucocorticoid replacement therapy.
Conclusion
Mild cortisol excess may co-exist in primary aldosteronism patients, reflected by
higher cortisol levels after overnight low-dose dexamethasone test.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP26
EP27
Bilateral adrenalectomy in Cushing’s syndrome: evaluation of quality
of life compared to other treatment options
Pauline Sarkis1, Muriel Rabilloud1, Anna Siamand2,
Jean-Christophe Lifante1, Olivier Chabre2 & Gérald Raverot1
1Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France;2CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble,
France.
Context
Bilateral adrenalectomy (BADX) has become an important treatment option of
Cushing’s syndrome (CS), especially when other treatments have failed. Long-
term outcome is not well known.
Objective
To evaluate long-term quality of life (QoL) of patients who underwent BADX for
CS compared to other therapeutic options.
Methods
Fourty five patients with all cause CS were identified: 23 patients had BADX and 22
underwent one or more of the following treatments: transphenoidal surgery, medical
therapy or radiotherapy. Medical records were retrospectively reviewed and entered
into a database. Each patient had to fill three questionnaires to evaluate their QoL:
Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36) and Cushing QoL questionnaire which are
rated over 100 (defined as the best QoL), and Beck depression inventory, the lower
limit for depression symptoms being established at 17.
Results
34
(75.6%)  patients  had  ACTH dependent  CS and  11 (24.4%)  had  ACTH
independent CS. Women prevailed (77.8%). The mean age of the patients was
51.3G16.4 years in BADX group and 48.4G16.3 in the other treatment group.
Patients who underwent BADX had an impaired QoL in each questionnaire. In the
SF-36, both physical and mental scores were altered, respectively at 52.4G20.9 and
53.6G22.9 compared to the other treatment group (69.4G22.5 and 63.3G20.2).
The most altered dimension was vitality: 35.4G22.7 vs 51.4G19.2 (P!0.05).
Cushing QoL questionnaire was also altered: 49G23.2 vs 59.7G20.1. Beck
depression inventory indicates that BADX group has still persistent symptoms of
depression, with a score of 17.9G12.7, which is not the case in the other group
(11.7G9.6).
Conclusions
Despite clinical remission, patients who underwent BADX have an impaired QoL
compared to patients who experienced another therapeutic option for CS. This
could be the consequence of a longer exposure to hypercortisolism. Further
investigations are needed to understand the causes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP27
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP28
Adenoma size could be an important predictor of Subclinical Cushing’s
Syndrome
Serkan Yener1, Mustafa Baris2, Mustafa Demirpence1, Secil Ozisik1,
Umit Cavdar1, Omer Demir3, Mustafa Secil2 & Abdurrahman Comlekci1
1Division of Endocrinology, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey;
2Department of Radiology, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir,
Turkey;3Department of Urology, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey.
Subclinical  Cushing’s  syndrome
(SCs)  is  used  to  refer  to  an  adrenal
incidentaloma with subtle autonomous cortisol secretion and without typical
signs and symptoms of hypercortisolism. Diagnostic criteria are uncertain and
arbitrary. In this study we aimed to investigate the power of adenoma size as an
independent predictor of SCs.
Dokuz Eylul University Adrenal Tumours Study Group database includes 596
patients by January 2016. Briefly, there are 332 subjects with non functioning
adrenal adenomas and 141 subjects (adrenal Cushing Syndrome was excluded)
with alterations in
1 mg dexamethasone suppression tests (1 mg DST). We
stratified the individuals according to the 1 mg DST results. Group A (nZ310,
1 mg DST !1.8 mg/dl), Group B (nZ68, 1.8 !1 mg DST!3 mg/dl), Group C
(nZ46, 3!1 mg DST!5 mg/dl) and Group D (nZ26, 1 mg DST O 5 mg/dl).
Adenoma size showed a strong relation with 1 mg DST results. Median size was
20, 25, 33 and 31 mm in Group A to D, respectively. The ROC curve analysis
showed that the cut-off of the adenoma diameter with the best diagnostic accuracy
for detecting individuals with a non-suppressed 1 mg DST level (O3 mg/dl) was
25 mm (sensitivity, 80%; specificity, 74%; AUC: 0.808, P!0.001). We also
evaluated prospective hormonal data in 110 individuals and demonstrated that
1 mg DST results were substantially stable among individuals.
The limitation of SCs screening to the individuals with larger adenomas would
decrease medical costs and further time consuming procedures.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP28
EP29
Long term folow-up of patients with adrenal incidentalomas and
subclinical hypercortisolism: a single center experience
Miomira Ivovic1,2, Ljiljana Marina1,2, Milina Tancic-Gajic1,2,
Zorana Arizanovic1, Jelena Milin-Lazovic1,2, Dragana Rakovic1,
1,2
Zorana Stojanovic1, Aleksandra Paunovic1 & Svetlana Vujovic
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Disease, Clinical Center
serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;2School of Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Serbia.
It has been more than 70 years since the first adrenal incidentalomas (AI) were
described. Most of these tumors are non-secreting, and are found in 4-7% of adult
population. Patients with subclinical hypercortisolism (or autonomous cortisol
secretion) (SH) are observed in 1-29% of patients with AIs. Evidence suggests
that this condition may be associated with higher prevalence of diabetes, obesity,
hypertension and osteoporosis.
Between 1999 and 2015, 857 patients with AI were evaluated in Department for
Obesity,  Reproductive  and  Metabolic  Diseases,  Clinic  for  Endocrinology,
Clinical Centre of Serbia. Seventy-two patients were diagnosed with SH based
on two out of three criteria: 1 mg overnight dexamethasone cortisol O83 nmol/l,
low basal ACTH (below 14 ng/l) and lack of diurnal cortisol rhythm (midnight
cortisol O150 nmol/l). Fifty-nine women and thirteen men, mean age 58.37G
8.25 years and mean BMI 28.91G5.19 kg/m2. Thirty-seven (51.38%) patients
had bilateral tumors and thirty-five (48.61%) had unilateral tumors, mean tumor
size  was
37.91G10.88 mm  and mean  follow-up  was  5.02G2.98  years.  At
admission fifty-nine patients (81.94%) had hypertension, 20 (27.7%) had glucose
intolerance, 18 (25%) had diabetes and 20 (27.75%) had osteoporosis, 14 patients
(19.44%) already suffered cardiovascular events (nine had myocardial infarction
and one had a stroke). During the follow-up period one patient (1.38%) had a
stroke,  one
(1.38%)  developed  diabetes,  five
(6.94%)  developed  glucose
intolerance  and  one
(1.38%)  patient  decreased  bone  mineral  density  to
osteoporotic levels. Three patients underwent surgery due to tumor growth.
Pathohistology showed cortical adenoma.
During the average follow-up of 5 years of 72 patients with SH and AI, 1.38%
have  had  a  new  cardiovascular  event,  but  nearly
7%  developed  glucose
intolerance which is important when deciding about the optimal management
and follow-up strategies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP29
EP30
Do lipid profile predict subclinical Cushing’s Syndrome in patients with
adrenal incidentalomas?
Gesthimani Mintziori, Thomas Georgiou, Athanasios Siolos,
Fotini Adamidou, Zoe Efstathiadou, Panagiotis Anagnostis,
Athanasios Panagiotou & Marina Kita
Department of Endocrinology, Ippokratio General Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece.
Introduction
Adrenal Incidentalomas (AIs) have been associated with an increased risk of
metabolic syndrome and dyslipidemia, though evidence regarding the latter is
limited and, sometimes conflicting. Lipid abnormalities in patients with AIs have
been described to be associated with subclinical hypercortisolism. Our aim was to
test if lipid profile in patients with adrenal incidentalomas may predict subclinical
Cushing’s Syndrome (sCS).
Material and methods
Ninety-four patients (nZ94) with adrenal incidentalomas (AIs) were included in
a prospective cohort study. All patients were followed up for three years and
alternations of their hormonal and lipid profiles were recorded. IBM SPSS
Statistics v20 were used.
Results
The 94 patients (25 men and 69 women) of our cohort harbored 111 AIs. There
were no differences between patients with sCS and those without, with respect to
their baseline lipid profile and blood pressure (systolic and diastolic). Non-HDL
concentrations decreased over time (Repeated Measures ANOVA, PZ0.013),
despite  patients’  Body  Mass  Index
(BMI)  remaining  unchanged.  Logistic
regression  revealed  that  the  only  predictor  of  sCS  is  the  size  of  adrenal
incidentalomas, as calculated by computed tomography (CT).
Conclusion
The current study demonstrated that lipid profile at baseline or during follow up
cannot predict sCS in patients with adrenal incidentalomas. The improvement of
patients’  lipid  profile  during  follow  up  is  probably  due  to  better  medical
management.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP30
EP31
Primary aldosteronism - results from the first Portuguese multicentre
study
Tiago Nunes da Silva1,2, Vera Fernandes2,3, Diana Martins2,4,
Diana Gonçalves2,5, Raquel Almeida2,6, Ana Margarida Monteiro2,3,
Carolina Neves2,7, Helder Simo˜ es2,8, Pedro Marques2,10, Filipa Alves2,9 &
Maria Pereira2,3
1Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal;2Grupo de Estudos Tumores da
Supra-renal, Portugal;3Hospital de Braga, Braga, Portugal;4Centro
Hospitalar Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;5Centro Hospitalar
Sa˜o João, Porto, Portugal;6Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal;
7Hospital Curry Cabral, Lisboa, Portugal;8Hospital das Forças Armadas,
Lisboa, Portugal;9Hospital de Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal;10Instituto
Português de Oncologia de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
Primary  Aldosteronism
(PA)  is  the  most  prevalent  cause  of  secondary
hypertension. The aim of this work was to characterize the diagnostic workup,
treatment and follow-up of confirmed PA.
The adrenal tumour study group of the Portuguese Society of Endocrinology
undertook the first retrospective multicentre study of Portuguese PA patients.
Data was gathered from nine Portuguese Endocrinology centres (three in the
north, one in the centre and five in the south). The data was analysed with
SPSS 21.
Sixty-three cases were selected with a mean age of diagnosis of 52.1G13.1 years;
9.9 years after the diagnosis of hypertension. At presentation 32.8% of patients
had  hipokalemia  and
22.9%  resistant  hypertension
(52%  with  R3  drugs).
Baseline laboratory investigation showed a mean serum aldosterone of 33.4 ng/dl,
plasmatic renin activity (PRA) of 0.2 ng/ml per h with a aldosterone/PRA of 97.1.
Confirmatory testing was performed with saline infusion in 91.7% (aldosterone
O10 ng/dl in 84.4%) and captopril in 23.7% (positive in 85.7%).
Imaging showed adenomas in 87.3% (mean size: 1.7 cm), hyperplasia in 3.2%
and bilateral cases in 13.6%. Arterial venous sampling (AVS) was conclusive in 1
case (11%). Iodocholesterol scintigraphy was done in 22% with unilateral fixation
in 64% and no fixation in 29% (nodule size 1.5-1.8 cm). Iodocholesterol and CT
agreed in 50%.
Patients were treated with laparoscopic adrenalectomy in 58.3% and aldosterone
antagonists in 41.7% (median spirolactone dose of 62.5 mg/d). The surgical
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
treated group had a bigger tumour size (1.8 vs 1.5 cm, PZ0.022), less duration of
hypertension
(8
vs
14
years,  PZ0.002)  and  higher  prevalence  of  anti-
hypertensive treatment at presentation (100 vs 75% PZ0.009). During follow-
up (median 2.5 years), there was a trend towards more hypertension cure in the
surgical treated group (92.6% vs 70.6%, PZ0.089).
This is the first Portuguese PA multicentre study. It shows that PA remains an
under-diagnosed condition with a significant delay in diagnosis. Surgical treated
patients had a more aggressive disease and showed a trend towards better
hypertension control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP31
EP32
Adrenal pigmentation in PPNAD is a result of melanin deposition and
associated with upregulation of the melanocortin 1 receptor
Dominic Cavlan, Chris Evagora, Dan Berney, Helen Storr, Will Drake &
Peter King
Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.
Primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease (PPNAD) is a form of bilateral
adrenocortical hyperplasia characterised by small to normal sized adrenal glands
containing multiple small cortical pigmented nodules. It may occur indepen-
dently, but 90% of cases are a manifestation of the Carney complex. Most cases of
PPNAD are diagnosed before age 30, and are the result of a germline mutation in
PRKAR1A or PDE11A, leading to upregulation of cAMP signalling. It is a cause
of  ACTH-independent  Cushing’s  syndrome.  The  cause  of  the  black/brown
pigmentation in PPNAD has not been definitively established, although some
authors have ascribed it to lipofuscin, a product of lysosomal breakdown.
Paraffin-embedded  bilateral  adrenalectomy  specimens  from  five  paediatric
patients with PPNAD were subjected to a series of histological and immunohis-
tochemical  staining  techniques.  Haematoxylin  and  eosin  staining  revealed
intracellular deposits of a brown pigment that was removed by permanganate
bleaching. The pigment was negative on Ziehl-Neelsen staining, and strongly
positive with the PERLS and Masson-Fontana stains. Immunohistochemistry
showed strong staining within the nodules for the melanosome marker HMB-45.
These findings identify the pigment as melanin. The adrenal nodules in all five
cases immunostained strongly positive for the melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R),
and for 11b-hydroxylase, the final enzyme in the steroidogenic pathway leading to
cortisol production.
We suggest that the autonomously activated cAMP signaling pathway associated
with PPNAD leads to upregulation of the MC1R, induction of steroidogenic
enzymes, and generation of melanin within melanosomes. We hypothesise that the
mechanism for hyperpigmentation in Carney complex skin lesions has a similar
aetiology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP32
EP33
Androgen producing adenoma in a patient with non-diagnosed
congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Mikuláš Kosák1, Václav Hána jr1, David Michlasky´2, Jozef Kubinyi3 &
Václav Hána1
13rd Department of Medicine - Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General
University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic;21st Department of Surgery -
Department of Abdominal, Thoracic Surgery and Traumatology, First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital,
Prague, Czech Republic;3Institute of Nuclear Medicine, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University General University Hospital, Prague,
Czech Republic.
Androgen secreting adrenal tumor is a rare cause of androgen excess in women.
There are only few case-reports of androgen producing adenoma in a patient with
congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Our patient, 61 year old woman was referred to our department for progressive
hirsutism and androgenic alopecia. She did not mention neither excessive facial
hair growth nor balding until age of 59 when rapidly progressive balding and
overt hirsutism started. She has had three childbirths and three abortions in
the past.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Laboratory evaluation showed markedly elevated levels of androgens and other
adrenal steroids (testosterone 9.1 nmol/l ((upper limit 3,0), DHEA androstendion
82.67 nmol/l (upper limit 6,30), DHEA: 7.30; S_DHEA: 4,78 (mol/l (upper limit
3,70) and 17-OH progesteron: 228.00 nmol/l (upper limit 4,50)). ACTH as well as
urinary free cortisol were normal. Physiological pattern of diurnal variability of
cortisol  secretion  was  preserved.  In  overnight  low-dose  dexamethason
suppression test partial supressibility of elevated androgens was preserved.
Gynecological investigation did not show any pathology in her ovaries. On CT
there were enlargement (tumors) of her adrenals (40!30!30 mm in the right
gland and 30!25!20 mm in the left). We have performed scintigraphy with
131I-6b-iodomethyl-19-norcholesterol which showed enhanced accumulation of
the substance in the right adrenal gland. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy of the right
adrenal was performed. Histology proved cortical adenoma 40!30!20 mm with
diffuse hyperplasia of the surrounding adrenal tissue.
There was a significant decrease in testosterone postoperatively (1.66 nmol/l) as
well as of androstendion (6.21) and DHEAS (0.39). On the contrary 17-OHP
remained elevated (129.26) and ACTH raised up to 229 ng/l. Genetic test for
suspected  congenital  adrenal  hyperplasia
(21
OH  def.)  revealed  compound
heterozygosity for CAH. Treatment with corticosteroids, to supress the androgen
overproduction from the left adrenal was commenced.
Conclusion
Androgen  secreting  adenoma  is  a  rare  cause  of  hyperandrogenism.  In  the
presented case adenoma had developed in a patient with, so far undiagnosed,
congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP33
EP34
Menstrual function in women with cushing’s disease (CD)
Irina Komerdus1, Larisa Akulkina2, Anastasiia Chekanova1 &
Alexander Dreval1
1Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute n.a. Vladimirsky,
Moscow, Russia;2Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
Background
Menstrual abnormalities (MA) can be the first sign of the disease.
Aim
To assess the structure of MA before and after treatment of CD.
Material and methods
Twenty-eight women with CD 39 (31.8;43.5) y.o., were investigated initially and
3.5
(2;5.5) years after treatment. Patients were subdivided into three groups: with
normal cycles (NC; 26-30 days), oligomenorrhea (31-120 days), amenorrhea
(O120 days).
Results
Before  treatment  of  CD,  NC  had
3
(10.7%),  oligomenorrhea
8
(28.6%),
amenorrhea 17 (60.7%). UFC were higher in women with MA than in women
with NC (993G629 and 536G159 nmol/24 h, PZ0.05). 1) 17 women with
previous amenorrhea. Remission was achieved in 11: NC restored in 2 (18.2%),
oligomenorrhea - 4 (36.4%), amenorrhea - 5 (45.4). Persistence of CD in 6: NC
restored in 2 (33.3%), 4 (66.7%) have amenorrhea. 2) three women with initially
NC. Remission in 2: 1 NC, 1 amenorrhea. One woman with persistence of CD
now  has  oligomenorrhea.  3) eight  women  with oligomenorhea  initially. In
remission-6: NC 1 (16.7%), oligomenorrhea 4 (66.6%), amenorrhea 1 (16.7%).
Two have persistence of CD: 1 amenorrhea, 1 oligomenorrhea.
In overall after treatment of CD, NC had 6 (21.4%), oligomenorrhea 10 (35.7%),
amenorrhea
12
(42.8%).  In
19
with  remission,  NC  have
4
(21.1%),
oligomenorrhea 8 (42.1%), amenorrhea 7 (36.8%). In nine with persistence,
NC have 2 (22.2%), oligomenorrhea 2 (22.2%), amenorrhea - 5 (55.6%). There
were no any differences between those with remission and persistence of CD.
Patients with remission and amenorrhea were significantly older and had less
weight loss after treatment of CD, than patients with remission and NC. Patients
with  persistence  of  CD  had  no  any  differences  between  groups.  Pituitary
insufficiency did not correlate with MA. Spontaneous pregnancy occurred in two
patients with remission of CD and oligomenorrhea.
Conclusion
MA are common both before and after treatment of CD. Women with remission
and women with persistence of CD have not any differences in frequencies
of MA.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP34
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP35
The effect of stress, diet and analytical methods on the levels of corticoid
metabolites
Michaela Duskova, Lucie Sosvorova, Jana Vitku, Hana Jandikova,
Tereza Chlupacova, Jose De Cordeiro & Luboslav Starka
Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic.
Introduction
A precisely measured corticoid level is important for decision-making in daily
clinical practice. These levels can be influenced in the pre-analytical phase, when
the effect of stress, timing, and diet can be important.
The aim of this study was to elucidate optimal conditions for blood sampling
as well as the choice of analytical methods, which they will be used in measuring
of corticoids.
Methods
By studying ten women, we focused on the influences of the stress of cannulation
and a large lunchtime meal on cortisol, cortisone, aldosterone and corticosterone
levels. We further compared results of cortisol measurements from RIA and
LC-MS/MS.
Results
Stress from cannulation caused increase of cortisol, cortisone and corticosterone
already, when the cannula was being inserted. This indicates that this increase is
stimulated by fear of the blood drawing rather, than just by the needle insertion
itself. The effect of stress on corticosterone disappeared after an hour, while effect
on other corticoids was still apparent.
Concerning the lunchtime meal, we found an increase in all measured corticoids
between 11 and 12 o’clock. After the food, there were marked decreases in
cortisone and aldosterone, while declining levels of cortisol and corticosterone
had rather plateaus.
We compared cortisol in 90 plasma samples measured by a commercial RIA kit
and  the  LC-MS/MS  method.  Results  from  both  methods  showed  a  strong
correlation (rZ0.85).
Conclusion
When measuring corticoid metabolites, the chosen analytical method, eliminating
stress factors, and precisely timed blood sampling considering the daily rhythm
and food intake are critical.
This study was supported by the project MZCR for conceptual development of
research organization 00023761 Institute of Endocrinology and grant NV16-27925A.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP35
EP36
Adrenocortical carcinoma: single center experience
Pinar Sisman1, Ahmet Bilgehan Sahin2, Ozen Oz Gul1, Soner Cander3,
Erdinc Erturk1 & Canan Ersoy1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Uludag University Medical
School, Bursa, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Uludag
University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey;3Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital,
Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Adrenocortical  carcinoma
(ACC)  is  a  rare  endocrine  malignancy,  with  an
incidence in the literature of 0.5 to 2 cases per million population per year. The
most important prognostic factors are stage of cancer at the time of diagnosis and
success of the first surgery. However, advanced age, tumor size, functionality,
high Ki-67 index (O10%), necrosis, and high mitotic activity are among poor
prognostic factors.
Patients and method
Fifteen patients diagnosed with adrenocortical carcinoma, were included in
present study. The patients’ data were collected by scanning their electronic
records. Age, sex, surgery procedure, resection margin, treatment and prognosis
were analyzed.
Results
Ten  of  15  patients  included  in  our  study  were  men
(66.7%).  Descriptive
characteristics of the patients and the tumors are provided. R0 resection rate could
be achieved in fewer than 50% of the patients. Eight patients were not given
postoperative adjuvant therapy. While mitotane was administered to 6 patients,
combined  systemic  chemotherapy  was  given  to
2
patients.  Two  patients
underwent adjuvant radiotherapy. Overall survival rates, median survival time
and progression free survival time are provided. Nine patients died during follow-
ups. In our study, the rate of development of metastases in patients with complete
surgical resection was significantly lower than in patients without R0 resection
(P!0.05). There was no statistically significant difference in median survival
time,  rate  of  locoregional  recurrence  and  metastases  among  patients  who
underwent open or laparoscopic surgery. Mitotane, systemic chemotherapy and
radiotherapy had no statistically significant positive effect on survival.
Conclusion
Complete surgical resection of tumoral tissue is the most important factor for
long-term survival, but, even if R0 resection is achieved high recurrence rate is
seen. Therefore, it is often a need for additional postoperative adjuvant treatment
modalities, but the efficacy of them is limited.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP36
EP37
CYP11B2 polymorphism affects the aldosterone - renin ratio?
Lukasz Zukowski1, Janusz Mysliwiec2, Natalia Wawrusiewicz-Kurylonek1
& Maria Górska1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Diseases,
Bialystok, Poland;2Department of Nuclear Medicine, Bialystok, Poland.
Introduction
Nowadays is believed that primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most frequent cause
of secondary hypertension and reaches 10% of whole hypertensive population.
The activity of the mineralocorticoid hormone may be change by polymorphism
of aldosterone synthase gene (CYP11B2) e.g. in promoter -344T/C region. Aim of
this study was to find differences in baseline plasma aldosterone concentration
(PAC), plasma renin activity (PRA), aldosterone - renin ratio (ARR) and plasma
aldosterone concentration post saline infusion suppression test (SIST) in genetic
model of CYP11B2 -344T/C (TT, TC, CC).
Material and methods
The study group consist 151 patients who were diagnosed because of a suspicion
of primary aldosteronism. Normality data distribution was checked by Shapiro -
Wilk test. The significance of differences between the groups was evaluated
through Student’s t-test. The differences in frequencies between categorical data
were tested for statistical significance with c2 tests.
Results
There were no significant differences in distribution of these alleles in comparison
with distribution described in European population in “1000 Genome” Study. The
statistical significance was demonstrated between homozygotes (TT and CC) only
in ARR. In TT genetic model ARR was markedly higher than was in CC genetic
model (PZ0.048 CI 95%). Finally, 18 (11.9%) patients were diagnosed with PA,
11
(13.25% of all TC) with TC allele, six with TT (20% of all TT) and only one
with CC (2.6% of all CC).
Conclusion
Genetic model consisting thymine instead cytosine in -344 region of promotor
CYP11B2 suggest predisposition to primary aldosteronism which is expressed
mainly by impairment of ARR. TT genetic model in comparison with CC model
significantly  raises  ARR  but  changes  in  PAC  and  PRA  almost  remains
unnoticeable. This suggest TT genetic model as factor slightly decreases PRA
and simultaneously slightly increases PAC what giving quotient PAC and PRA
markedly elevated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP37
EP38
Moderate/severe Hypovolemic Hyponatremia with urinary sodium loss
secondary to Hypoaldosteronism: analysis of 28 cases
Rona Penso1, Ana Ortola1, Angela Amengual1, Irene Crespo1,
Teresa Ruiz-Gracia1, Martin Cuesta-Hernandez2, Emilia Gomez-Hoyos3,
Clara Marcuello1, Alfonso Calle1 & Isabelle Runkle1
1Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain;2Beaumont Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland;3Hospital Clinico Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
Introduction
Hypoaldosteronism (HA), a cause of hypovolemic hyponatremia (HN) with
urinary(U) sodium(Na) loss, is often underdiagnosed. We studied 28 patients with
an episode of HA-induced moderate/severe hyponatremia.
Methods
Retrospective 2012-2015. In all patients, Nadir(N) serum(S) Na !130 mmol/l
(corrected for total proteins and glycemia), low internal yugular venous pressure,
low ocular pressure. Addison’s Disease ruled (ACTH, cortisol and/or Synacthen
test).  UNaO25 mmol/l,  U  osmolality(Osm)O Plasma(P)  Osm,  Transtubular
Potassium Gradient (TTKG)! 5. Group I (GrI) (10/28) had risk factors for
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
aldosterone deficit (heparin, ARBs, ACEi, aliskiren, NSAIDs, and/or tacrolimus),
Group II (GrII) (2/28) risk factors for mineralocorticoid resistance (obstructive
uropathy,  urinary  infection,  renal  transplant,  NSAIDs,  trimetroprim,  and/or
spironolactone), Group III (GrIII) (16/28): both. Na, Potassium (K) values in
mmol/l, Osm mOsm/kg. t-test, X2, Spearman’s Rho, Kruskal-Wallis, Mann-
Whitney U. Results given as Mean (S.D.) unless stated otherwise.
Results
12/28 females, age: 71.36 (15.55). 78.6% had either chronic renal disease (12/28),
diabetes (13/28) or both (3/28). NSNa: 121.82 (5.19) with SK of 5.08 (0.63).
Values at diagnosis (D): SNa: 126.07 (5.62), SK: 4.93 (0.62). UNa:73.03 (38.66),
TTKG:3.6(0.85), POsm:277.78 (12.47), UOsm:392.53(167.75), In mg/dl: SUrea
50.78
(25.23) SCreatinine:1.12 (0.56), uricemia:5.26 (1.45). NSNa GrI:123.9
(3.18), GrII:121.2 (2.83), 83), GrIII:120.63(6.12). Corresponding SK GrI:4.85
(0.62), GrII:4.65
(0.49). GrIII:5.27
(0.62). GrII  aldosteronemia-345.5
pg/ml
(20.51)- was higher than in GrI:103
(60.3) or GrIII:117.85
(88.4). Median
reninemia tended to be lower in GrI: 7 pg/ml (3.5-11.5) than GrIICIII: 21 (5-67),
PZ0.08. Patients with both high renin(O25) and low aldosterone(!100), all in
GrIII,  had  significantly  lower  NSNa:113.33(4.04)  than  the  rest:123.19(4.2),
PZ0.033. Heparin(11/28), trimpetroprim (8/28), or both (6/28) were precipitat-
ing factors in 46.4% patients, and associated with significantly lower DSNa:123.7
(5.82) vs128.13 (4.69) PZ0.038, and lower DPOsm:271.23 (11.45) vs 283.47
(10.63), PZ0.007.
Conclusion
Hypoaldosteronism can induce marked hyponatremia. Most patients had risk
factors  for  both  inhibition  of  aldosterone  secretion  and  mineralocorticoid
resistance. Heparin and/or trimetroprim use was associated with lower SNa and
SOsm levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP38
EP39
The classical form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia-clinical
characteristics and genetic analysis
Elwira Przybylik-Mazurek, Anna Kurzynska, Anna Skalniak,
Jakub Piatkowski & Alicja Hubalewska-Dydejczyk
Department of Endocrinology Medical College Jagiellonian University,
Kraków, Poland.
Classical form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is associated with the
impairment of enzymes involved in process of adrenal steroidogenesis. More than
90% of CAH cases are connected with mutations in the 21-hydroxylase gene
CYP21A2 in the HLA class III area on the short arm of chromosome 6p21.3. CAH
is characterized by a strong correlation between the genotype and the phenotype.
Mutations  in  the  CYP21A2
gene  can  cause  different  degrees  of  loss  of
21-hydroxylase enzyme activity resulting in various clinical characteristics.
Fifty patients
(31 females and 19 males) with classical form of CAH were
involved  in  the  study
(43
with  salt  wasting  form  and  seven  with  simple
virilization).  Patients  anthropometric,  hormonal  and  metabolic  data  were
assessed. In females history of reconstructive gynecologic surgery and fertility
aspects were also assessed. In 31 patients genetic analysis using MLPA with use
of probemix SALSA MLPA P050 CAH from MRCHolland was performed.
The average height in group of females was 155,36 cm and 179 cm in males
respectively. Median woman’s BMI was 28.18, while in case of man-24.26. The
average concentration of serum fasting glucose was 4.97 mmol/l and of total
cholesterol 4.96 mmol/l. The average age of menarche was 14 years, but almost
all women had different menstrual abnormalities. Seventeen females underwent
reconstructive gynecologic surgery. Fourteen different types of genetic changes
were found in thirty one patients, who had genetic testing. In six patients were
found changes only in one allele and in one female patient no changes in both
alleles of CYP21A2 gene.
Genetic defects are well correlated with the phenotypes of classical form of CAH.
Further studies are required to search for new genetic disorders which may be
responsible for development of CAH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP39
EP40
Analysis of 176 cases of adrenal incidentaloma investigated in a single
clinical center, what are we doing?
Maria Maiz Jimenez1, Maria Calatayud Gutierrez1, Milagros
Sierra Bracamonte1, Soledad Librizzi1, Virginia Rodriguez Ni
˜o2,
Myriam Lorena Partida Mun˜oz1 & Federico Hawkins Carranza1,2
112 Octubre Hospital, Madrid, Spain;2Complutense University, Madrid,
Spain.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Patients  referred  for  adrenal  incidentalomas
(AI)  are  increasing.  Current
guidelines are controversial on diagnosis and length of follow-up.
Objectives
Analyze clinical, radiologic and hormonal characteristics of patients with AI.
Evaluate the number and usefulness of tests needed for diagnosis, clinical
outcome and follow up.
Material and methods
Observational, retrospective study in patients with AI in our endocrinology
department from 1993-2014, including oncologic patients. Those with hormonal
hyperproduction symptoms were excluded.
Results
One hundred and seventy six patients (111F/65M) were included. Medium age:
59.68G12.54 (31-84) years. Radiologic study: Medium radiologic tests per
patients was 4.14G2.69 (1-14) during a medium follow up: 3.65G3.75 (0-18)
years. Initial radiological diagnosis: 13% undetermined lesions, 69% adenoma,
6% hyperplasia, 3% mielolipoma, 2% malignant and 1% pheochromocytoma.
84% were !4 cm and 29% were bilateral. Functional study included: 1 mg
dexamethasone suppression test (1 mg DST), basal ACTH, UFC and urinary
catecholamine. Medium follow up: 3.75G3.5 (0-17)years. 75% patients had at
least one altered test; 1mgDST was altered in 80 patients (47.3%), only 33
patients (19%) met criteria for subclinical Cushing syndrome (SCS). Functional
diagnosis: 64% (107) nonfunctioning, 19% (33) SCS, 4% (8) pheochromocyto-
mas,
3%  (5)  clinical  adrenal  Cushing(CAC),
1 ACTH-dependent  Cushing.
Malignancy: Metastases were diagnosed in six patients, all with previous cancer
history. No adrenal corticocarcinoma (ACC) was diagnosed. Outcomes: seven
patients developed SCS, no patients with SCS developed CAC. Four tumors had
significant  growth:  two  were  metastases.  No  patients  developed  malignant
transformation to ACC.
Conclusions
The majority of AI are small, benign, non-functioning and remained stable even
in patients with long follow up. Most of them were well defined with the first
radiologic test. In our serie SCS is the most frequent hormonal alteration, but
transformation in CAC was not found. Low incidence of malignant transfor-
mation in non-oncologic patients and the lack of hyperfunction development
should make us reconsider our practice to avoid prolonged follow up and
unnecessary testing.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP40
EP41
The role of DHEAS in diagnosis of subclinical hypercortisolism in
patients with adrenal incidentalomas
Ljiljana Marina1,2, Miomira Ivovic1,2, Milina Tancic-Gajic1,2,
Zorana Arizanovic1,2, Jelena Milin-Lazovic2,3, Dragana Rakovic1,2,
Zorana Stojanovic1,2, Isidora Petkovic1, Tijana Petkovic1 &
Svetlana Vujovic1,2
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Clinical
Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;3Institute of Medical Statistics and Informatics,
Belgrade, Serbia.
At present there are no unified diagnostic criteria for subclinical hypercortisolism
(SH) in patients with adrenal incidentalomas (AI). Recently it has been proposed
that an age and gender specific DHEAS ratio (calculated by dividing DHEAS by
the lower limit of the respective reference range) has a significant diagnostic value
in detection of SH.
The aim was to evaluate the value of DHEAS as a diagnostic tool for SH.
Retrospectively we evaluated 140 AI patients admitted to Department for obesity,
reproductive and metabolic diseases, Clinic for endocrinology, diabetes and
metabolic diseases, Clinical centre of Serbia. SH was diagnosed if a patient had at
least two out of three criteria: 1mg overnight dexamethasone cortisol (1 mg dex)
R83 nmol/l,  suppressed  ACTH
(below
14 ng/l)  and  midnight  cortisol
R150 nmol/l. Seventy-five patients had nonfunctional AI (NAI), mean age
60.23G11.60 years, mean BMI 28.71G5.56 kg/m2  and mean DHEAS 1.66G
1.27 mmol/l. Sixty-five patients had SH, mean age 59.45G7.95 years, BMI
28.53G4.79 kg/m2, DHEAS 0.70G0.53 mmol/l. We used Mann-Whitney U test,
ROC curve and linear regression analysis.
There was no significant difference in terms of age and BMI (PO0.05). DHEAS
and DHEAS ratio levels were significantly lower in patients with SH (P!0.001).
However, we could not identify the value that would be specific and/or sensitive
enough for the detection of SH. Univariate analysis with 1 mg dex being the
dependent showed that both DHEAS (PZ0.004, bZK0.250) and DHEAS ratio
(PZ0.004,  bZK0.252)  had  a  significant  predictive  value.  However,  this
significance got lost in the multivariate regression analysis showing that the only
significant predictors were midnight cortisol (P!0.001, bZ0.627) and ACTH
(PZ0.003, bZK0.203).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
In conclusion, even though our study did not identify the specific cut off DHEAS
value for diagnosis of SH, DHEAS proved to be significantly lower in SH than in
NAI making it a valuable additional diagnostic tool for SH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP41
EP42
What can a tissue measured steroid metabolome tell about adrenal
tumor? A tissue steroid analysis of cortisol producing adenoma and an
androgen producing adenoma in a second patient with CAH,
21-hydroxylase deficiency
Václav Hána  (Jr)1, Mikuláš Kosák1, David Michalsky´2, Václav Hána1 &
Martin Hill3
13rd Department of Internam Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic;2First Department of Surgery, First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic;3Institute
of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic.
Introduction
A key feature of a benign adrenal tumor is its hormonal production. It is reflected
by serum steroid levels. A tumoral tissue steroid content is not commonly
measured.
Methods
A steroid metabolome comprising of 65 steroids was measured in four samples
from  each  of  two  patients  using  GC-MS  in  serum  before  and  after
1mg
dexamethasone test, in the tumoral tissue and in the adrenal tissue of two female
patients  with  adrenal  adenomas.  The  first  was  a  patient  with  CAH,
21-hydroxylase deficiency with a unilateral androgen producing adenoma. The
second was a female patient with a cortisol producing adrenal adenoma.
Results
In the patient with CAH and androgen producing adenoma there were less C21
steroids including the most 5a/b-reduced-progesterone metabolites in contrast to
the elevated levels of androstenedione and 17oxo-5a/b-reduced C19 steroids in
the tumoral tissue compared to the surrounding adrenal tissue, which points to the
classic
‘frontdoor’  pathway  of  androstenedione  metabolism  as  well  as  to
alternative
‘backdoor pathway’ in the synthesis of reduced androstanes via
cleavage of reduced progesterone metabolites by CYP17A1. In spite of higher
testosterone levels in the tumoral tissue there is surprisingly a tendency to lower
levels of its 5a/b-reduced metabolites (5a/b-androstane-3a/b,17b diols).
The patient with a cortisol producing adrenal adenoma showed consistently
higher  levels  of  both  pregnane  and  androstane  steroids  downstream  the
17-hydroxypregnenolone including testosterone and its unconjugated testosterone
metabolites (5a/b-androstane-3a/b,17b diols and 16a-hydroxytestosterone).
Conclusions
In the patient with CAH, there is reduced activity of the C17a-hydroxylase step
and elevated activity of the C17, 20 lyase step in CYP17A1 of the tumoral tissue
as compared to the adrenal one.
In the tissue of cortisol producing adenoma, the CYP17A1 activity is elevated in
both CYP17A1 steps.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP42
EP43
Primary bilateral diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of adrenals presenting
as incidental adrenal masses
Cristina Alina Silaghi1,2, Delia Dima3, Carmen Georgiu4, Delia Lupu5,
Ionela Lungu1, Anca Elena Craciun6, Daniel Tudor Cosma6, Cristina
Sorina Catana7, Horatiu Silaghi8 & Romeo Chira9
1County Emergency Hospital, Cluj Napoca, Romania;2Department of
Endocrinology, ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cluj Napoca, Romania;3Departament of Hematology, Institute of Oncology
‘Prof. Dr Ion Chiricuta’, Cluj Napoca, Romania;4Discipline of Pathology,
Department of Morphological Sciences, ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania;5IInd Internal Medecine
Departament ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cluj Napoca, Romania;6Diabet, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases Clinical
Center, Cluj Napoca, Romania;7Department of Medical Biochemistry ‘Iuliu
Hatieganu’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania;
85th Departament of Surgery ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania;9Ist Internal Medecine Departament,
‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca,
Romania.
Primary  adrenal  non-Hodgkin  lymphoma
(PANHL)  is  extremely  rare  and
constitutes !1% of all NHLs and 3% of extranodal lymphoma. PANHL affects
predominantly elderly and males and could arises in the presence of a preexisting
autoimmune adrenalitis. Diffuse large lymphomas of B-cell origin (DLBCL)
histology is reported in 70% of PANHL cases.
The present case is a primary, bilateral DLBCL of adrenal in 75-year-old male
patient admitted for abdominal pain, weight loss and fatigue. He had no known
past history of lymphoma or other carcinoma. Abdominal CT scan revealed an
incidental, bilateral, marked, homogenous adrenal gland enlargement, measuring
15!8 cm on the right and 9!4.8 cm on the left (both masses O10 HU), with no
lymphadenopathy or visceral involvement.
Serum metanephrines, renine, aldosterone and 24-h urine cortisol levels were
normal. Depot-ACTH stimulation test demonstrated an insufficient response with
an  increase  from  baseline  plasma  cortisol  of
15.2 mg/dl
(normal  range:
7-22 mg/dl)  to
17.8 mg/dl  after
4h and an elevated plasma ACTH of
112.7 pg/ml
(normal  range
7.2-63.3 pg/ml),  indicating  a  primary  adrenal
insufficiency
(AI). Testosteron and 17OH progesterone were normal. Serum
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was increased. A biopsy of the adrenals confirmed
DLBCL (intense positive CD 20 and negative CD10, CD 99, synaptophisin, Hep-
Par expression). Ki 67 was 90%. His bone marrow was not involved at diagnosis.
Following  hydrocortisone  substitution  therapy,  the  patient  completed  six
R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and predniso-
lone) courses of chemotherapy. FDG PET-CT revealed no tracer uptake in both
adrenal masses or in lymph nodes and the patient is still in remision after 8
months. The prognosis is poor and is worsened by increased LDH, increased age,
AI, and large tumor size. This case should remind clinicians that PANHL may be
a cause of bilateral adrenal incidentaloma with or without AI.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP43
EP44
A microdeletion of PRKARIA associated with Carney complex
Fotini Adamidou1, Gesthimani Mintziori1, Charalampos Lyssikatos2 &
Constantine Stratakis2
1Department of Endocrinology, Ippokratio General Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece;2Section on Genetics and Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda,
USA.
Background
Carney complex (CNC) is a rare multiple neoplasia syndrome, its commonest
endocrine manifestation being ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome, histo-
logically characterized by primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease
(PPNAD).  There  is  significant  genetic  and  phenotypic  heterogeneity,  but
deletions at 17q24.2 are rare. We describe the particular characteristics of a
patient with a microdeletion in this area.
Case report
A 37-year-old male was referred to the Endocrine Consult Service by the Internal
Medicine department, following an episode of severe hyponatremia with altered
consciousness  and  rabdomyolysis.  He  had  a  history  of  cyclical  Cushing’s
syndrome from the age of 5 and had bilateral adrenalectomy at the age of 10. He
had been on lifelong hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone replacement, but was not
adherent to the medications, due to concurrent problems with alcohol abuse. His
GH, IGF1 and prolactin measurement were normal. He had suffered a non
traumatic subcephalic right femoral neck fracture 2 years previously and had a
total hip BMD of 0.604 and a Z-score K2.8 on the left. On examination, he was
lean, with pectus excavatum, thoracic spine scoliosis, small testes (8 and 10 ml),
and multiple lentigines on the trunk and buccal mucosa. The patient had a normal
echocardiogram,  testicular  ultrasound  was  significant  for  bilateral  micro
calcifications and he had no other clinical or laboratory evidence of endocrine
dysfunction.
Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed a 0.98 kb deletion at 17q24.2. Testing
of his mother and sister detected no genomic imbalance of 17q24.2. Because the
patient’s father was deceased, it is not feasible to ascertain whether this was a
de novo or inherited mutation.
Conclusion
Despite significant but also overlapping phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity,
PPNAD - whether clinically indolent or apparent- is the most frequent endocrine
manifestation of CNC and should prompt genetic confirmation and long term
surveillance for other syndromic manifestations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP44
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP45
Prevalence of primary hyperaldosteronism as secondary hypertension;
our experience
Ergita Nelaj1, Margarita Gjata1, Ariet Gjika2 & Mihal Tase1
1University Hospital Center, Tirana, Albania;2Salus Hospital, Tirana,
Albania.
Background
Primary hyperaldosteronism is one of the major causes of secondary hypertension,
with a prevalence rate of about 4-10% in the hypertensive population. Increased
secretion of aldosterone usually comes from adrenal adenoma or their hyperplasia
(uni or bilateral). Renines plasma levels are reduced as a result of the body’s
efforts  to  curb  renine-angiotensin  system.  It  can  also  be  associated  with
hypokalemi, but not always, more than 60% may not have hypokalemi.
Methods
The study included all of hypertensive patients hospitalized in the Internal
Medicine for 1 year. These patients have undergone examinations such as
glycemia,  uremia,  creatinin,  liver  tests,  lipidograma,  electrolytes,  ECG,
Echocardiography. In patients with resistant hypertension has been realized
abdominal CT and in cases of suspicion of Conn adenoma is received plasma
aldosterone and plasma renines activity.
Results
The total number of patients with hypertension was 399, age 59.47G13.64 years,
of whom 162 (40.6%) were male and 237 (59.4%) women. Of these 141 (35.3%)
were patients with resistant hypertension, and of these 35 (8.93%) resulted in the
Conn Adenoma, confirmed by imaging and laboratory. Men were 23 (63.9%)
patients and female 13 (36.1%). Of these 7 (19.4%) patients were presented for
the first time with hypertension. 15 (41.7%) patients were hospitalized with
hypertensive crisis. Average KC  in these patients was 3.89 mg/dl. (S.D. 0.47)
Echocardiography in these patients shows TS 12.56 (S.D. 1:42), DTD-VM 49.61
(S.D. 5:59), TP 11:42 (S.D. 2.12).
Conclusions
Primary hyperaldosteronism is one of the most common causes of secondary
hypertension. Hyperaldosteronism prevalence was about 9%, with a predomi-
nance in males about 64%. The initial diagnostic test to confirm the diagnosis is
the  aldosteron/renine  ratio.  Regarding  getting  in  CT  imaging,  not  always
unilateral or bilateral hyperplasia or finding a formation of adrenal glands deals
with primary hyperaldosteronism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP45
EP46
Ipilimumab immunotheraphy for advanced melanoma induced auto-
immune adrenalitis
Julia Silva-Fernández1, Rafael Morales-Chamorro2, Francisco
Javier Gómez-Alfonso1, Florentino Del Val-Zaballos1,
Álvaro García-Manzanares-Vázquez de Agredos1, María López-Iglesias1,
Rafael García-Ruiz3 & Inés Gómez-García1
1Endocrinology Department, La Mancha Centro Hospital, Alcázar de San
Juan, Spain;2Oncology Department, La Mancha Centro Hospital, Alcázar
de San Juan, Spain;3Neurology Department, La Mancha Centro Hospital,
Alcázar de San Juan, Spain.
Introduction
Ipilimumab is a monoclonal antibody against the inhibitory CTLA-4 receptor
expressed on T cells. It provokes an upregulation of the immune system. It is
known to cause neuroendocrine disorders, such as hypophysitis, hyppothyr-
oidism/thyroiditis  and  adrenal  insufficiency.  Althought  it  is  stipulated  that
thyroid.stimulating hormone (TSH) levels should be evaluated before adminis-
tration of each dose of ipilimumab as a screen for thyroid diyfunction, there is no
requeriment for screening pituitary-adrenal biochemistries.
Case report
A 68 year-old woman presented to Emergency Department with extreme fatigue (2
months of progressively worsening fatigue which provoked her visit to general
doctor) and hyponatremia after receiving 4 doses of ipilimumab for metastatic
melanoma (three months ago). Elevated ACTH levels, low morning cortisol levels
along with failed to repond to cosyntropin stimulation test demonstrated primary
adrenal  insufficiency.  Computed  tomography  scan  of  the  abdomen  showed
bilateral enlargement of adrenal glands with metastatic desease in the right one. She
was started on replacement dose of hydorcortisona with resolution of symptoms.
Conclusions
We recommend monitoring ACTH and cortisol levels in patients receiving
ipilimumab therapy, similar to the routine screening thyroid function tests done to
screen for hypothyroidism/thyroiditis, which is less frequent and sympomatic
compared with adrenal insufficiency. CT findings of enlarged adrenal glands
afther ipilimumab therapy should raise the suspición of drug-induced adrenalitis
and may imply a monitoring of the patient’s adrenal function.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP46
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP47
Cardio metabolic parameters in non-functional adrenal adenoma
Alp Atasoy1, Evrim Cakir2, Suleyman Ahbab1, Yasemin
Erdogan Doventas3, Macit Koldas3, Esra Ataoglu1 & Mustafa Yenigun1
1Internal Medicine, Haseki Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey;2Endocinology and Metabolic Diseases, Haseki Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;3Biochemistry, Haseki Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Objective
The aim of the present study was to evaluate cardio metabolic risk factors in
patients with non-functional adrenal adenoma.
Materials and methods
We studied thirty newly diagnosed adrenal adenoma patients and 30 healthy
participants. Fasting glucose, insulin, lipid, hormone profile were evaluated from
each patient.
Results
The frequency of diabetes mellitus and hypertension were statistically higher in
adrenal adenoma group. Lipid profile was similar between groups. Mean fasting
glucose, insulin, HOMA-IR, triglyceride and uric acid levels were higher in
adrenal  adenoma  group  compared  with  the  control  group,  however;  the
differences did not reach statistical significance. Mean hsCRP and CIMT were
significantly higher in adenoma group.
Conclusion
Cardio metabolic risk factors were found to be higher in non-functional adrenal
adenoma. Therefore; patients with adrenal adenoma should be monitored for
cardiovascular disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP47
EP48
Cushings syndrome due to carneys complex - case series and a report of
a new mutation from South Indian Tertiary care centre
Kavya Jonnalagadda, V P Praveen, Nisha Bhavani, R V Jaykumar,
Vasantha Nair, Harish Kumar, Arun Menon & Usha Menon
Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi, Kerala, India.
Introduction
Carneys  complex  is  an  uncommon  cause  of  ACTH  independent  cushings
syndrome which occurs as a combination of myxomas, spotty pigmentation and
endocrine  overactivity.  Primary  pigmented  nodular  adrenocortical  disease
(PPNAD) is seen in 25-45% of patients with Carneys complex.
Methods
Three patients who were suspected with carneys complex were studied to look if
their biochemical radiological and clinical characters could predict postoperative
diagnosis of carneys complex.
Clinical presentation
Mean age of onset of symptoms was 17 years. All the patients had diabetes
hypertension, cushingoid features and spotty pigmentation of the face.
Investigations
Elevated  blood  sugars,  normal  serum  electrolytes,  Baseline  cortisol
(mean
17.3 mg/dl) Dexamethasone suppressed cortisol was significantly higher (mean
19.9 mg/dl) than baseline cortisol, supressed serum ACTH, CT abdomen showed
unilateral nodular lesion in two cases with other adrenal normal sized with
nodular borders and one case showed bilateral normal sized adrenals with nodular
borders. Gross and HPE was suggestive of bilateral PPNAD. To confirm PPNAD,
sequence analysis and deletion testing of PRKAR1A gene was done. Mutation
was found in 2 out of 3 patients. A new variant in PRKAR1A gene was identified
in one patient (C769GOA; E 257K). Genetic testing is negative in one patient.
Conclusion
Multiple lentiginosis, a higher dexamethasone suppressed cortisol compared to
basal cortisol suppressed ACTH and radiological evidence of nodular adrenals
can predict carneys complex in a patient with cushings syndrome. Genetic testing
could be negative, which is not unusual as positive genetic testing is found only in
60-70% of patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP48
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP49
Cushing’ s disease, hasimoto’s thyroiditis and severe
hyperandrogenemia
Ana Valea1,2, Irina Ciocan2, Mara Carsote3, Andra Morar2, Dan
Dumitru Pop4, Cristina Ghervan1,2 & Carmen Emanuela Georgescu1,2
1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;2Endocrinology Clinic, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;3Carol Davila
University of Medicine and Pharmacy & C.I. Parhon National Institute of
Endocrinology, Bucuresti, Romania;4Department of Radiotherapy, Prof.
Dr. Ion Chiricuta Oncology Institute Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction
Cushing’s disease (CD) is caused by high adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH),
usually by a pituitary microadenoma.
Material and method
This is a case report investigated in several Romanian centers by performing:
morning plasma cortisol, circadian rhythm of plasma cortisol, plasma ACTH,
dexamethasone (DXM) suppression tests.
Case data
A 57-year female, known with hypertension and osteopenia, was admitted for
high  blood  pressure,  fatigue,  anxiety,  sweating  and  hirsutism.  Clinical
examination revealed: moon face, plethora, hirsutism (on upper lip, lower jaw,
sideburn, lower abdomen and thigh; Ferriman-Gallwey score of 18, centripetal
obesity; buffalo hump, enlarged supra-clavicle fat pads and cervical. Endocrine
evaluation indicated normal thyroid function with positive anti-thyreoglobulin
antibodies (283.3 UI/ml, normal !50 UI/ml), high levels of morning plasma
cortisol (249 ng/ml, normal 70-225 ng/ml) with loss of circadian rhythm, ACTH
level within the upper reference range (41.1 pg/ml, normal !46 pg/ml) and a
very high testosterone level (6.1 ng/ml, normal 0.2-0.75 ng/ml). Biochemical
parameters indicated hypertriglyceridemia, low potassium and neutrophilia. Non-
suppression at DXM 1 mg overnight test and 50% suppression at high dose of
DXM leaded to a diagnosis of CD. Imagery did not identify any tumor. No
ovarian, neither adrenal tumor was found in correlation to high testosterone levels
so CD was considered the only cause.
Therefore the patient was treated with steroid synthesis inhibitor-Ketoconazole
(800 mg/day), with clinical improvement: decrease of hirsutism and normal-
ization  of  testosterone  level  to
0.2 ng/ml  within  months.  Follow-up  and  a
definitive therapy is needed.
Conclusions
Severe hyperandrogenism as seen here in CD is rare, most probably is correlated
with  adrenal  androgen  production  and  thyroid  autoimmunity  is  incidental;
therapeutically control of CD represents a clue of the etiological diagnosis of
hyperandrogenemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP49
EP50
Adrenal infarction in antiphospholipid syndrome despite therapeutic
anticoagulation
Eleanor Wong1, Michael Watts2,3 & James A O’Hare1,3
1Department of Endocrinology University Hospital Limerick, Limerick,
Ireland;2Department of Medicine University Hospital, Limerick, Ireland;
3University of Limerick Graduate Entry Medical School, Limerick, Ireland.
We report a case of acute adrenal crisis in a patient with the antiphospholipid
syndrome in a man who was on a therapeutic dose of warfarin. A 64-year-old man
presented with vomiting and abdominal discomfort. Temperature was 37.8 8C,
pulse 85/min and BP 100/63 mmHg. On examination, there was generalized
hyperpigmentation. He had a history of deep venous thrombosis of the lower
limbs on two occasions and was on warfarin. He previously diagnosed primary
antiphospholipid syndrome with a strongly positive anticardiolipin IgG antibody.
Serum sodium was 127 mmol/l, and serum potassium was 5.7 mmol/l, urea
9.8 mmol/l and Creatinine 103 mmol/l. Haemoglobin was 12.6 g/dl, white cell
count of 7.3/109/l. INR was 3.1 on warfarin, APTT 133 secs and prothrombin
32.7
secs.  Primary  adrenal  insufficiency  was  suspected.  The  Tetracosactrin
(Synacthen, 250 ugrams) test had a maximum stimulated cortisol of 43 nmol/l
(normal  O550 nmol/l)  confirming  adrenal  insufficiency.  CT  of  Abdomen
revealed  bilateral  adrenal  enlargement
(right  adrenal:
3.1 cm!2.9 cm,  left
adrenal:
3.0 cm!2.5 cm). At the time there was diagnostic uncertainty and
biopsy considered risky, Tuberculosis was considered and was treated for a
number of months though no bacteriological or other clinical features diagnosed
were established. PET scan was negative for evidence of malignancy. Double
stranded Anti-Nuclear Antibody was negative. Beta-2 glycoprotein was positive.
Adrenal antibodies tested negative. On a repeat CT Abdomen 4 months later, his
adrenal glands shrunk to 1 cm bilaterally and on review suggested that there was
haemorrhagic infarction initially. He made a good recovery on hydrocortisone
and fludrocortisone. INR target was increased to 3.5. After 5 year follow up there
was no further infarction. Learning Point: this case illustrates that adrenal
infarction can occur in antiphospholipid syndrome despite conventional antic-
oagulation perhaps because of the adrenal vascular has only single venous
drainage but multiple arterial arcades making it more susceptible to thrombosis
and haemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP50
EP51
Pediatric Cushing’s disease and paraduodenal tumor
Ana Valea1,2, Maria Breaban2, Mara Carsote3, Andra Morar2, Dan Dumitru
Pop4, Carmen Emanuela Georgescu1,2 & Cristina Ghervan1,2
1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;2Endocrinology Clinic, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;3Department of
Endocrinology Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Bucharest & C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest,
Romania;4Department of Radiotherapy, Prof. Dr. Ion Chiricuta Oncology
Institute Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction
Cushing’s disease (CD) in youth represents a challenge especially related to the
therapy and long-term management.
Materials and methods
We report the medical history of a child with CD who was followed-up for 7
years. Suggestive endocrine panel and imagery is exposed.
Case presentation
A 19-year female was diagnosed at age of 12 with CD. Clinical assessment
revealed: weight gain, headache, hyperpigmentation predominantly on the areas
subjected to friction. Hormonal profile found: plasma ACTH of 48.9 pg/ml
(N:7.2-63.3 pg/ml), baseline plasma cortisol (8 a.m) of 486.4 nmol/l (N:172-
497 nmol/l) and (8 p.m.) of 220.1 nmol/l (N:71.1-286 nmol/l), plasma cortisol
after 1 mg overnight dexamethasone (DXM) suppression test of 347.6 nmol/l
(N:!50 nmol/l) and after 2 days!8 mg DXM of 41.7 nmol/l, suggestive for
ACTH-dependent hypercortisolism. The initial pituitary MRI did not detect
anomalies but a subsequent examination described a pituitary microadenoma.
Adominal CT scan with and without enhancement and abdominal MRI revealed a
periduodenal tumor of 12/8 mm, which raised the question of a neuroendocrine
tumor which was not confirmed by pathological report based on biopsy (via
superior digestive endoscopy). The patient underwent transsphenoidal surgery
with  selective  removal  of  the  pituitary  microadenoma  and  persistent  CS
intermittently treated with steroidogenesis inhibitors and imagery follow-up of
the periduodenal mass. Currently, high plasma ACTH levels of 95.56 pg/ml with
elevated  basal  plasma  morning  cortisol  of
404.7 nmol/l  and  inadequate
suppression after 1 mg DXM overnight of 81.2 nmol/l. Pituitary MRI was status
quo and pasireotide was recommended.
Conclusion
Despite the potential differential diagnosis with ectopic Cushing’s syndrome
related to the paraduodenal tumor, pediatric CS represents a rare yet severe event
and the methods to achieve the disease control in this particular population are
still suboptimal.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP51
EP52
Adrenal leiomyoma: a rare cause of adrenal incidentaloma
Maria Manuel Costa1,2, Sandra Belo1,2, Pedro Souteiro1,2, Joao Magalhães3
& Davide Carvalho1,2
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism of Centro
Hospitalar de São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal;3Department of Pathology of Centro
Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Leiomyomas are benign tumors originating from the smooth muscle cells. They
occur more frequently in the uterus and in the gastrointestinal system. Adrenal
leiomyomas are rare tumors arising from the smooth muscle of the adrenal vein
and its tributaries.
Case report
Man, 72-years-old, referred to Endocrinology in the context of an adrenal
incidentaloma (20 mm maximum diametre) detected in abdominal-pelvic CT
performed for the study of splenomegaly. He had arterial hypertension, well
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
controlled with two antihypertensive drugs. Family history was irrelevant and
physical  examination  did  not  reveal  any  sing  suggestive  of  adrenal
hyperfunctioning. CT scan performed 12 months after diagnosis (January 2013)
showed a left adrenal nodule with 25 mm, with density values compatible with
atypical adenoma. Biochemical evaluation confirmed that it was nonfunctioning.
CT scan was repeated on April 2015 showing a nodule with irregular borders,
with 38 mm, with 34HU and slow contrast washout. Considering the lesion
characteristics the patient underwent left adrenalectomy. The histological result
was in favor of a well-differentiated smooth muscle neoplasm with leiomyoma
characteristics.  Immunohistochemical  study  confirmed  the  diagnosis  of
leiomyoma with positive cells for alpha-actin and desmin and negative for
c-Kit and S100 protein.
Conclusions
The adrenal incidentaloma are often found during the investigation of other
diseases not related to adrenal and may be a variety of tumors. The leiomyoma is
very rare and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of incidentalomas.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP52
EP53
Ectopic expression of serotonin receptors in adrenocorticotropin-
independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia
Saad Ghada, Chadli Molka, Dendana Emna, Hasni Yosra, Maaroufi Amel,
Kacem Maha & Ach Kousay
Endocrinology and Diabetology Department, Farhat Hached Hospital,
Sousse, Tunisia.
In  ACTH-independent  macronodular  adrenal  hyperplasia
(AIMAH)  causing
Cushing’s syndrome, cortisol secretion is controlled by illegitimate membrane
receptors. In the normal adrenal gland, agonists of 5-HT4 receptors have a
powerful effect on aldosterone secretion but little effect on cortisol secretion
in vitro.
The aim of our study is to describe the clinical and hormonal features of patients
diagnosed with aberrant serotonin receptor expression.
We report the cases of three patients diagnosed with bilateral AIMAH. All
patients were females, aged 40, 30 and 74 years respectively. The AIMAH was
associated with clinical Cushing’s syndrome in a patient and a subclinical
Cushing’s syndrome in two others. The presence of aberrant serotonin receptors
was associated with aberrant GIP and angiotensin receptors in a patient, to
catecholamine receptors in the second and isolated in the third.
Serotonin receptors are probably the most functional receptors in AIMAH.
Indeed, their frequency is high in many published series. The simultaneous
expression of several aberrant receptors linked to G protein makes difficult to
identify the action of each receptor and the part of cooperation between the
different  receptors.  The  characterization  of  the  pharmacological  profiles  of
ectopic receptors in AIMAH provides opportunities for development of new
pharmacological  therapies.  Because  numerous  adrenal  hyperplastic  tissues
express more than one type of illegitimate receptor, drugs targeted to common
transduction mechanisms of illegitimate receptors, including T-type calcium
channel blockers, may prove to be useful for reducing cortisol synthesis and/or
cellular proliferation in AIMAH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP53
EP54
Cushing’s syndrome in King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital:
experience from a single tertiary referral hospital
Wasita Warachit & Sarat Sunthornyothin
King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
Objective
To assess clinical characteristics, management and outcome of treatment of
Cushing’s syndrome (CS) in King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital (KCMH).
Method
We performed a retrospective evaluation of 82 patients with CS in KCMH during
2001-2015. Median follow-up time was 36 months [interquartile range 11-35].
Results
Of the 82 patients, Cushing’s disease (CD) was diagnosed in 45 patients (55%).
Twenty-six patients had adrenal tumor and 11 patients had ectopic ACTH
syndrome. Median age at diagnosis was 38 years old. Median time between first
presentation and diagnosis was 12 months. 24% of the patients had normal body
mass index. Skin abnormalities (purplish striae, facial plethora, easy bruising)
were found in 21-37%. The preoperative ACTH was higher in ectopic ACTH
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
syndrome and CD compared to adrenal Cushing’s syndrome. In CD, 34 patients
(76%) had pituitary microadenoma and 11 patients had pituitary macroadenoma
(24%). Twenty-five patients (74%) with pituitary microadenoma were cured after
their first transphenoidal surgeries. All patients with persistent hypercortisolism
were cured after subsequent treatment. In patients with pituitary macroadenoma,
five were cured after the first surgeries. Only one patient had remission of CS after
subsequent treatment. In adrenal Cushing’s syndrome, cortisol-producing adrenal
adenoma was the most common etiology. Median size of tumor was 3 cm. All
patients were cured. Ectopic ACTH syndrome were diagnosed in 11 patients.
Primary tumors were located in eight patients (bronchial and thymic carcinoids,
small cell lung cancer, medullary thyroid carcinoma). Seven patients died and
three patients had persistent hypercortisolism. Only one patient was cured.
Conclusions
CD was the most common etiology of CS. However, higher prevalence of adrenal
CS was observed. Lower prevalence of patients with overweight or obesity as
well as skin abnormalities compared to previous studies. In all subtypes of CS,
surgery remained the mainstay of treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP54
EP55
Outcome with surgical treatment in subclinical hypercortisolism
Cristina Moreno, Miguel Paja, Alba Zabalegui, Maddalen Dublang,
Eider Etxeberria, Amelia Oleaga & M Teresa Gutiérrez
Hospital Universitario Basurto, Bilbao/Basque Country, Spain.
Introduction
Subclinical hypercortisolism (SH), a condition of biochemical cortisol excess
without the classical signs or symptoms of overt hypercortisolism, is thought to be
present in the 5-30% of patients with incidentally discovered adrenal mass
(adrenal incidentalomas). Some evidence suggest that this condition may lead to
long-term consequences of cortisol excess, but indication and potential benefits of
adrenalectomy in this state are still in doubt. We analyse a series of patients with
SH operated in our center to assess its clinical course after surgery.
Methods
Retrospective study in 25 patients (19 women, 6 men) with an average age of 61.4
years (45-83) between 2001 and 2015. Indication for surgery was performed if
they met at least two of the following criteria: urinary free cortisol levels higher
than 100 mg/24 h, serum cortisol levels after a 1-mg overnight dexamethasone
suppression test (Nugent) O1.8 mg/dl, ACTH levels lower than 10 pg/ml and low
serum DHEAS (for sex and age). Clinical and laboratory characteristics of the pre
and postoperative state are collected.
Results
The cause of diagnosis was mainly adrenal incidentaloma (84%). At diagnosis,
76% of patients had hypertension, and 64% GAA or DM. All patients but one had
Nugent O1.8 mcg/dl. Adenomas were mostly left (76%), with an average size of
34.8 cm. Of the 21 patients with more than 1 year of postoperative follow-up,
62%  experienced  improvement  in  blood  pressure  values  or  carbohydrate
metabolism.  Postoperative  replacement  therapy  with  glucocorticoids  was
required in 60% of patients, with an average duration of 4.6 months (3-15). No
preoperative biochemical, clinical or radiological parameter was associated with
postoperative clinical response.
Conclusion
In 60% of our cases adrenal surgery for SH led to a marked improvement in
glycemic control and/or hypertension. We found no biochemical parameter for
predicting this favorable response.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP55
EP56
Addison’s disease warrants large package of care costs due to
substantial comorbidity
Ian Louis Ross1, Cara Biden2 & Rory Leisegang1
1University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa;2Medscheme,
Cape Town, South Africa.
Introduction
Patients with Addison’s disease are burdened by substantial comorbidity and
likely require a large package of care. There is a proportion of South African
patients who can afford private health-care, comparable to health-care offered in a
developed country. We hypothesised that comprehensive package of care costs
for Addison’s disease is relatively high.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Methods
We identifed 131 patients with Addison’s disease within a private sector cohort,
using ICD 10 code (E27.1). Demographic, co-morbidity and cost analysis data
from claims were collected as of November 2015 (Rand/EUROZ0.06), for the
duration that the patients were members of a medical insurance company.
Results
The  median  (IQR)  ages  were  51  (37-67)  in  2015  and  commencement  of
membership 46 (33-62.5) years, respectively and membership duration 61.9
(36.4-103.5) months. There were 56% female patients, 75 and 100% received
hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone, respectively. The most prevalent comorbid-
ities were: hypothyroidism (34%), hypertension (32%), hyperlipidaemia (28%),
gastro-oesophageal  reflux  disease
(12%),  congestive  cardiac  failure
(8%),
depression (8%), ischaemic heart disease (7%), and type 2 diabetes mellitus
(6%). 15 and 7% of patients with Addison’s disease had at least one adrenal crisis
and one admission for ischaemic heart disease, respectively within the study
period, with median number of admissions per patient of 2 (1-4). From the
perspective of the provider, mean overall and mean monthly overall direct costs
for patients with Addison’s disease were V15 163.80 and V304.26, respectively.
The  mean  comparable  costs  for  patients  with  both  hypertension  and
hyperlipidaemia were V10 911.47 and V181.50, and for AIDS patients on
antiretroviral treatment (ART) were V10 643.93 and V236.00, respectively.
Conclusions
Substantial comorbidity, predisposition to adrenal crises, ischaemic heart disease
contribute to the higher average package of care cost of Addison’s disease,
compared to patients with both hypertension and hyperlipidaemia, and patients
on ART.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP56
EP57
Testosterone and cortisol co-secretion by an adrenocortical adenoma
presenting as secondary polycythemia
Fotini Adamidou1, Gesthimani Mintziori1, Efthymia Vlahaki2 &
Apostolos Kambaroudis3
1Department of Endocrinology, Ippokratio General Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece;2Second Department of Internal Medicine, Ippokratio General
Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;3Fifth Department of Surgery, Ippokratio
General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Background
Androgen co-secretion in patients with adrenal Cushing’s syndrome is considered
a marker of malignancy. Mixed secretion by benign adrenocortical tumors is rare.
We describe a case of a middle aged woman presenting with Cushing’s syndrome
and polycythemia.
Case report
A 57-year-old lady was referred by the Hematology Service to our Endocrine
Clinic for evaluation of an adrenal mass found in an abdominal CT in the course
of investigating secondary polycythemia. The patient, a 35 pack-year-smoker,
had presented with upper arms petechiae and a hematocrit of 52 and hemoglobin
of 17, while it was up to 42 up to 5 years previously. Jak2V617F mutation
analysis was negative. Her past history was notable for natural menopause at age
45,  recent  onset  hypertension  and  dyslipidemia.  She  had  noted  worsening
hirsutism on her trunk and arms. On clinical examination the patient had the
classic Cushinoid features, Ferriman Gallwey score 17, marked female pattern
hair loss but no other signs of virilization. The pertinent lab findings were as
follows: Hb 16.3 g/dl, Ht49.1%, K 4.8, glucose
115 mg/dl, ALT 29 mg/dl,
cortisol after overnight dexamethasone suppression 483 nmol/l (!50 nmol/l),
24 h UFC 405, ACTH 1 pg/ml (7.2-63.6), aldosterone 6.24 ng/dl (4-31), plasma
renin activity 0.17 ng/ml per h (0.5-4.7), testosterone 3.49 nmol/l (0.43-1.24),
estradiol 18 pg/ml (!50), DHEAS 50.8 D4-androstenedione 3.4 ng/ml (0.3-3.3)
17OH-progesterone 2.64 ng/ml (0.2-1), erythropoietin (EPO) 18 mU/ml (!25),
24 h-urine metanephrines 66 mg (52-341) TSH 2.18 mIU/mL and O2sat 98%. On
laparoscopic adrenalectomy, a 2.5 cm adrenal adenoma, Weiss score 0, was
removed  without  complications  and  oral  hydrocortisone  supplementation
postoperatively.  One  month  following  excision,  her  labs  were  as  follows:
hematocrit 42%, hemoglobin 13.6 g/dl, potassium 4.9, testosterone 1.27 nmol/l
(0.43-1.24), EPO 14 IU/l (2.6-34), DHEAS 7.2 mg/dl (18.9-205) and undetect-
able D4-androstenedione.
Conclusions
i)  clinically  apparent  androgen  co-secretion  in  adrenal  Cushing  does  not
necessarily  equate  to  malignancy  ii)  secondary  polycythemia  may  be  a
noteworthy  multifactorial  presentation  of  a  secretory  adrenal  adenoma
independent of smoking status, mediated by direct EPO tumor production and
marrow stimulation by cortisol testosterone.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP57
EP58
Endosonography - an important diagnostic tool in identifying a small
aldosterone-producing adenoma in a patient with primary
hyperaldosteronism - case report
Simona Raluca Bergmann & Peter Herbert Kann
Philipp’s University, Faculty of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and
Diabetology, Marburg, Germany.
Introduction
Primary hyperaldosteronism is still an underdiagnosed cause of hypertension. The
challenge lies however, not only in diagnosing the primary hyperaldosteronism,
but also in the distinction between aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) and
idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia (IHA). Establishing the correct diagnosis is after
all essential, because surgery is only effective in patients with adrenal adenoma.
Case report
We report about a 67-year-old patient, who presented with hypertensive crisis
with blood pressure up to 250/120 mmHg and intermittent hypokalemia below
2.8 mmol/l. Pheochromocytoma and Cushing’s syndrome have been excluded.
The routine laboratory tests displayed however an elevated plasma aldoster-
one/renin quotient as well as an elevated 24-h urinary excretion of aldosterone.
At this point the patient was being treated with five antihypertensive drugs and the
blood pressure was still indicating levels over 200/100 mmHg. It was therefore
not possible to discontinue the interfering antihypertensive therapy in order to
conduct further diagnostics. Both CT and MRI detected no abnormalities or
adrenal  adenoma.  The  endosonographic  examination  of  the  adrenal  glands
identified however a unilateral 8!6 mm small adrenal adenoma, which exhibited
the typical morphological signs of an APA. The patient underwent surgery. After
resection of the small adrenal adenoma, the aldosterone/renin quotient become
normal and the patient presented a stable blood pressure below 135/70 mmHg.
Discussion
This case indicates that in the differential diagnosis of primary hyperaldosteron-
ism, endosonography is more important than previously assumed in the literature.
Especially in difficult cases, the use of endosonographic examination should be
considered.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP58
EP59
Retrospective evaluation of adrenal incidentelomas
Ahmet Kaya, Mustafa Kulaksizoglu, Melek Caglayan & Feridun Karakurt
Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey.
Introduction
Adrenal incidentelomas are new era of the endocrinology. We aimed to see the
results of adrenal masses retrospectively.
Methods
Patients  admitted  to  the  Internal  Medicine  outpatient  clinic  for  different
complaints were retrospectively evaluated. Patients whom abdominal imaging
like ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging or computed tomography were
done and incedentally established adrenal masses were evaluated. Patients with a
history of hypertension, findings of hypokalemia, hypernatremia were excluded
from the study. Patients were hospitalised and adrenal function tests were done.
Results
There were totally 59 patients, 24 male (40.67%), 35 female (59.32%), and mean
ages were 57.54C11.29 years (32-75 years) in men and 55.71C11.72 years
(31-81)  in  women.  Adrenal  function  tests  revealed  that
53
(89.83%)
incidentelomas were nonfunctioning. Totally 6 (10.16%) patients’ adenomas
were functioning, 3 (5.08%) of them were pheochromacytomas, 1 was subclinical
Cushing syndrome and 2 (3.38%) were primary hyperaldosteronisms. 3 (5.08%)
of nonfunctioning adenomas were diagnosed as metastasis in computerized
tomography, one was small cell carcinoma, and one was prostate malignancy. The
other patient was operated and diagnosed as adrenal adenocarcinoma. In the
nonfunctioning group, two patients had cyst hydatid disease and were having
treatment for it and also two patients had accessesory spleen in the tomography.
Conclusion
Patients with adrenal incidentelomas should be evaluated for hyperfunctioning
and also metastasis from other organs should be kept in mind.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP59
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP60
Primary hyperaldosteronism: clinical and therapeutic approach of a
center
Diana Martins, Carolina Moreno, Carla Baptista, Isabel Paiva,
Daniela Guelho, Nuno Vicente, Luís Cardoso, Diana Oliveira,
Adriana Lages, Mara Ventura & Francisco Carrilho
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department of Coimbra
University Hospital Centre, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Primary hyperaldosteronism (HAP) is the main cause of secondary hypertension,
with a prevalence estimated between 6 and 20% in resistant hypertension. Clinical
suspicion  is  critical,  especially  if  aldosterone-to-renin  ratio
(ARR)  O25,
however  the  diagnosis  is  dependent  on  confirmatory  evidence,  including
aldosterone suppression tests.
Methods
Retrospective evaluation of 44 patients with suspected PAH, identified between
2010 and 2015 at a single center.
Results
Sixteen of 44 patients had hormonal findings consistent with the diagnosis: nine
men, seven women; mean age 60.50G9.75 years. Median time of hypertension:
9.00 years.
Fourteen patients had adrenal masses on CT evaluation (dimensions 1.44G
0.88 cm): 12 with unilateral nodules and two bilateral.
Aldosterone-to-renin ratio O25 in 14 patients and two patients presented with
ARR O20, associated to aldosterone O10 ng/ml with suppressed renin. All of
them with positive saline infusion test (SIT).
Eight  patients  undergone  laparoscopic  adrenalectomy;  anatomopathological
result: adrenal cortical adenoma in seven patients and adrenal hyperplasia in
one. Of these, four kept medical therapy with reduction of antihypertensive drugs.
Eight patients maintained medical therapy due to bilateral lesions, absence of
surgical conditions or intervention refusal.
Follow-up at 6 months: significant reduction of systolic BP (143.00G17.15 vs
133.00G13.37 mmHg; PZ0.008) and the number of required antihypertensive
drugs (2.00G0.85 vs 0.50G1.26; PZ0.004); systolic BP was also significantly
lower on surgically treated patients (120G13.22 vs 140G7.36 mmHg; PZ0.021).
Conclusions
On follow-up at 6 months, it was found a significant overall reduction in the levels
of systolic blood pressure and the number of antihypertensive drugs.
Surgical treatment produced a more significant reduction in the levels of systolic
BP compared with medical treatment alone. The reduction of serum aldosterone
levels was also higher in the group undergoing surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP60
EP61
Circadian rhythm of salivary cortisol & 6 - sulfatoxy melatonin in night
shift nursing professionals and actual day workers
B Anjum1,2, Narsingh Verma1, Sandeep Tiwari3, Ranjana Singh2 &
Abbas Mahdi2
1Department of Physiology, King George’s Medical University, Lucknow,
UP, India;2Department of Biochemistry, King George’s Medical
University, Lucknow, UP, India;3Department of Surgery, King George’s
Medical University, Lucknow UP, India.
Objectives
The present aimed to investigate the circadian pattern of salivary cortisol &
sulfatoxy melatonin level in night shift professionals and actual day workers & to
find out these changes in the circadian pattern produce by night shift are reversible
in due course of time.
Methods
56 Nursing professionals of both gender who perform day and night shifts and 56
actual controls were also recruited in this study. Saliva and urine samples were
collected at w8 h interval in their night shift and day shift schedule and in the
control subjects. Groups were compared by applying paired and unpaired t test.
Result
Significant difference was found in night cortisol levels among night (4.08G3.28)
vs  day  shift
(2.62G2.37),
(P!0.005),  while  in  controls
(1.82G1.18)
(P!0.0005) when compared to night shift. Alteration in mean morning cortisol
level was also found between night (3.88G2.54) vs day shift (54.79G2.46)
(P!0.05), while in controls (5.71G3.55) P!0.005 when compared to night
shift. Night melatonin level was found declined as compared to morning level and
this pattern was significant when compared night melatonin between night
(17.65G12.20) vs day shift (22.41G13.70), while in controls (25.45G17.20)
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(P!0.05) when compared to night shift. morning melatonin level between night
(21.08G14.50)  vs  day  shifts
(27.36G14.46)
(P!0.05),  while  in  controls
(28.91G16.20)
(P!0.05) when compared  to  night  shift.  Difference  was
insignificant  when  cortisol  and  melatonin  levels  found  in  night  shift  were
compare to actual controls and it elucidates the circadian pattern was recovered
in day shift.
Conclusion
Alterations in circadian pattern of salivary cortisol and melatonin sulfate were
found during night shift due to internal desynchronization. Sleep loss might be
associated with decreased melatonin level leads to endocrinal and cardiovascular
diseases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP61
EP62
A case of subclinical primary aldosteronism and subclinical Cushing’s
syndrome without risk factors of cardiovascular disease
Natsumi Kitajima1, Toshiro Seki1, Atsushi Yasuda1, Masami Seki2,
Masayuki Oki1, Atsushi Takagi1 & Masafumi Fukagawa1
1Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara-shi, Kanagawa-ken, Japan;
2Seirei Numazu Hospital, Numazu-shi, Shizuoka-ken, Japan.
A 49-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for the evaluation of adrenal
incidentaloma. She had no past medical history and no family history of notable
illness. The patient was 150 cm tall and weighed 60 kg. Her blood pressure was
103/60 mmHg.  She  had  no  Cushingoid  features.  Osteoporosis  was  absent.
Routine  laboratory  examinations  were  within  the  normal  ranges  including
normokalemia. The hormonal examination revealed normal circadian variation in
serum cortisol levels (11.7 mg/dl at 0800 h and 3.3 mg/dl at 2300 h) and plasma
ACTH  level  was  undetectable
(!2.0 pg/ml).  Plasma  cortisol  level  was
suppressed after the low-dose overnight dexamethasone suppression test but
was not suppressed after the high-dose test. The plasma aldosterone concentration
(PAC) level was normal (110 pg/ml) and the plasma renin activity (PRA) was
suppressed (0.1 ng/ml per h). The captopril test and furosemide-upright test were
positive, whereas the saline-loading test was negative. CT scans of the abdomen
showed bilateral adrenal tumors. Adrenal scintigraphy revealed bilateral adrenal
activity. To determine the laterality of the excessive cortisol or aldosterone
secretion, we performed adrenal venous sampling (AVS). Finally, we made a
diagnosis of subclinical primary aldosteronism (PA) caused by both adrenal
glands and subclinical Cushing’s syndrome (CS) caused by both adrenal tumors.
Interestingly, this patient had no risk factors for cardiovascular disease such as
hypertension, obesity, diabetes mellitus or dyslipidemia. Thus, we are observing
her without medical therapy. Three years after diagnosis, she has not been
detected  hypertension,  hypokalemia,  cardiomegaly  in  echocardiography  and
atherosclerosis in carotid ultrasonography. One important remaining question is
why excessive hormone secretion did not affect the cardiovascular status of this
patient. In this regard, several possible mechanisms have been reported including
mineralocorticoid resistance. Further study is going to resolve this issue.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP62
EP63
The relationship between androgen levels and NLR in hirsutism
Samet Sayılan1, Meral Mert2, Aylin Aydın Sayılan3, Ebru Ozturk1,
Yildiz Okuturlar1 & Hakan Kocoglu1
1Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educational and Research Hospital, Internal
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educational and
Research Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Istanbul, Turkey;
3Faculty of Nursing, Kirklareli University, Kirklareli, Turkey.
Introduction
Hirsutism is a disease in which, women chin, upper lip, chest, abdomen, showing
the terminal structure to increase hair growth in the male pattern of distribution as
androgen sensitive back and thighs are seen. Neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio (NLR)
has been proposed as a simple inflammatory marker of response. Increased value
of NLR cardiovascular venture in patients was found to be an indicator of poor
prognosis. In our study, we aimed to determine the association between regardless
of the etiology in patients with complaints of hirsutism, androgen levels in blood
neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio.
Materials and methods
248 patients admitted Hirsutism was examined. Hirsutism and menstrual histories
menarche, number  of pregnancies and  live births  and infertility history of
individuals, were questioned. In addition, hair loss, acne was recorded as signs of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
hyperandrogenism. Patients FSH, LH, E2, PRL, DHEAS, 17-OHP, androstene-
dione, total testosterone, free testosterone and follicle tests were measured phase.
Results
The study included between 16-70 years (mean age 28.67G9.29 years) were
enrolled 248 patients. Patients with (nZ73) and without (nZ175) hipeandroje-
nemi were compared. When the groups with and without hyperandrogenemia are
compared there occured no statistically significant difference between the NLR
(PO0.05). In contrast, significant differences were found between hematocrit
levels (P!0.05).
Conclusion
The presence of hyperandrogenism in hirsutism clinical practice cases are being
investigated. The relationship between hyperandrogenism and a parameter NLO
which is an early used parameter may be guider to the detection of inflammatory
or cardiovascular risk.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP63
EP64
ACTH-independent massive bilateral macronodular adrenal
hyperplasia
Rosa Márquez-Pardo, M Gloria Baena-Nieto, Lourdes García-García-
Doncel, Manuel Cayón-Blanco, Rosario López-Velasco & Isabel
Torres-Barea
Jerez Hospital, Jerez/Cádiz, Spain.
Introduction
The estimated annual incidence of Cushing’s disease ranges from 2 to 4 per
million. Bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (BMAH) accounts for !1%
of Cushing’s syndrome causes.
Case report
We present a case of 58-year-old man who had been suffering typical clinical
signs of hypercortisolism for
5 years. He presented hyperglycemia, arterial
hypertension, central obesity, thin skin, hemorrhagic diathesis, edemas, weakness
and  emotional  lability.  Endocrine  evaluation  of  adrenocortical  axis  proved
hypercortisolism of adrenal origin with increased 24-h urinary free cortisol (UFC)
(792 mg/24 h [4.3-176]), a low doses dexamethasone test with not suppression
(21.6 mg/dl [!1.8]), a loss of cortisol circadian rhythm (16.1 and 20.6 mg/dl
[!7.5])  and  low  ACTH  concentrations
(!5 pg/ml [3.7-19.4]).  Magnetic
resonance imaging of the adrenal gland demonstrated bilateral adrenal masses
(the  right and  the left  adrenal  measured  were
3.1!5!3  and 5!7!3 cm
respectively). A NP-59 iodocholesterol scintigraphy showed an increased uptake
of both adrenal glands.
With  the  diagnosis  of  Cushing’s  syndrome  ACTH-independent  caused  by
bilateral  adrenal  masses  surgery  was  made.  Bilateral  adrenalectomy  was
performed and histopathology revealed massive BMAH with multiple nodules
ranging in size from several mm to 3 cm. The weight of right and left adrenal
gland was 85 and 105 g respectively.
After that, hypercortisolism was solved and patient’s phenotype, diabetes and
hypertension disappeared.
Conclusions
BMAH is rare cause of Cushing’s syndrome. It more often presents as an
incidental radiological finding with underlying subclinical hypercortisolism. It is
usually detected in the fifth or sixth decade of life. Bilateral adrenalectomy
remains the main treatment for BMAH but unilateral adrenalectomy has been
proposed in selected cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP64
EP65
Schmidt’s syndrome - case report
Entela Puca1, Blertina Olldashi2, Ema Lumi3, Sonila Bitri1 & Agron Ylli4
1American Hospital, Tirana, Albania;2Neo-Style Clinic, Tirana, Albania;
3Regional Hospital, Korce, Albania;4UHC Mother Teresa, Tirana, Albania.
Introduction
Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type II (PGA-II) or Schmidt’s syndrome is
a very rare autoimmune disorder and difficult to diagnose because the symptoms
of this syndrome depends on the gland which gets involved first. Approximately
14-20 people per million population are affected by polyglandular autoimmune
syndrome type II. It is characterised by the obligatory occurrence of autoimmune
Addison’s disease in combination with thyroid autoimmune diseases and/or
type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Case presentation
A 40-year-old lady presented to the Emergency Department with complaints of
progressive weight loss 13 kg in eight months, anorexia, headache and vomiting.
Physical examination on admission revealed: Hyperpigmentation was mostly
expressed in the face, upper part of thorax, dorsal part of the hand. pulse
was 114/mins, BP-80/60 mmHg and respiratory rate-22/mins. leucocyte count-
6200 cells/mm3, Platelet count-31 4000 cells/mm3, fasting blood sugar-86 mg/dl,
renal function tests, liver function tests, serum potassium 8.1 (3.7-5.5) sodium
135
(136-148) Free T3 - 2.8 pmol/l, Free T4 - 10.6 pmol/l, TSH - 12.16 IU/ml,
random cortisol-2.23 ng/ml anti TPO level, Ac anti Tg 477.5 IU/ml. Hyperpig-
mentation, low cortisol level and high potassium raised the possibility of Type II
polyglandular autoimmune syndrome. cosyntropin test was suggestive of primary
adrenal  insufficiency. Normal  Abdominal  CT  and  Pituitary  MRI.  Antibody
against 21 (OH) were high 23 Norma !10. She was diagnosed as polyglandular
autoimmune  type  2  (or  Schmidt’s  syndrome).  She  was  started  on  steroid
replacement therapy. thyroxin 2 weeks after the steroid therapy. During her
follow- up after one year later she developed also Diabetes Mellitus and insulin
treatment was started. Our patient was treated and improved with corticosteroid,
thyroxine and insulin therapy.
Conclusion
Every patient with endocrine deficiency should be screened for other insufficiency
of other endocrine organs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP65
EP66
Iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome due to misuse of topical corticosteroids:
a case report
Emre Ali Acar, Emel Senol, Sena Ece Davarci, Neslihan Erdem &
Zeliha Hekimsoy
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Celal Bayar University Medical Faculty, Manisa, Turkey.
Introduction
Because of their anti-inflammatory effect, topical corticosteroids are widely used
in dermatological diseases. Topical use is typically safe, but serious adverse
effects induced by systemic absorption are occasionally reported. We report a
patient who developed Cushing’s syndrome due to long-term misuse of topical
bethametasone and clobetasol.
Case Report
A 24-year-old man presented with rapid weight gain and purple strias in multiple
areas.  He  had  moon  face,  supraclavicular  fat  deposition  and  purple  strias
bilaterally on the medial aspects of his arms, thighs and abdomen. We diagnosed
Cushing’s syndrome clinically, but his serum ACTH and cortisol levels were
extremely low. When we questioned him about using corticosteroids, he stated
that he did not use any medications. We performed an ACTH stimulating test but
he had no cortisol response. We interrogated him again about medication use and
learned that he had been using a steroid-containing ointment for two years due to
itching in his groin region. We asked him to stop using the ointment and within 3
months, his signs of Cushing’s syndrome abated.
Discussion
Because  of  their  anti-inflammatory  and  anti-proliferative  effects,  topical
corticosteroids have been used succesfully to treat dermatological diseases for
a long while. Although absorption of topical corticosteroids is low, long-term
application of these agents at high doses can increase the probability of systemic
adverse events. As use of superpotent agents has increased, reports of local and
systemic side effects have also increased. The risk for developing systemic side
effects depends on the agent’s potency, the length of treatment, application
frequency,  epithelial  integrity,  extensiveness  of  applied  area,  and  use  of
concomitant therapies. The most common etiology of Cushing’s syndrome is
iatrogenic. The use of topical agents should always be queried when taking a
medication history in order to discover any sources of exogenous steroids so that
appropriate treatment may be started.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP66
EP67
Non-Hodgkins B cell lymphoma presenting as acute adrenal crisis
Eleanor Wong1 & James A O’Hare1,2
1Department of Medicine and Endocrinology, University Hospital Limerick,
Dooradoyle, Limerick, Ireland;2University of Limerick Graduate Entry
Medical School, Limerick, Ireland.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
We present a rare case of Non- Hodgkins large B Cell lymphoma presenting as
circulatory collapse and acute adrenal insufficiency. A 47 year old woman was
referred with a 1 month history of weight loss of 7 kg and vomiting. Shortly after
admission her condition deteriorated and she developed acute hypotension, BP
was
92/58 mmHg,  heart  rate
100/mn  and  required  volume  resuscitation.
Examination  revealed  a  thin  woman  with  generalised  hyperpigmentation.
Serum  sodium  was
130 mmol/l,  serum  potassium
5.1 mmol/l,  creatinine
112 mmol/l and urea 7.1 mmol/l. Full blood count was normal. She had a history
of depression, peptic ulcer, hysterectomy and was taking Escitalopram 10 mg
daily. Acute adrenal insufficiency was suspected and peak post-Tetracosactren
(Synacthen) cortisol was 150 nmol/l (Normal O550 nmol/l). CT scan abdomen
revealed massively enlarged adrenals; 8.6!5.7 cm on the left and similar on the
right.  There  were  also  solid  polar  masses  in  the  kidneys  with  extrinsic
compression of the inferior vena cava. She rapidly improved with hydrocortisone
and  fludrocortisone.  Adrenal  biopsy  demonstrated  a  diffuse  large  B  cell
lymphoma (non-germinal center subtype). Proliferation fraction was 60%. PET
scan demonstrated uptake in the right rib, bone marrow aspiration did not show
evidence  of  infiltration.  Staging  was
4b.  She  was  treated  with  Rituximab,
Cyclophosphamide,  Doxorubicin  and  Vincristine
(CHOP).  Antiphospholipid
screen IgG antibody was negative. She subsequently went into a partial remission
with a modest reduction in adrenal dimensions. Lymphoma with partial adrenal
hypofunction has been reported to involve the adrenals in 3% of cases.
Learning points: i) This Lymphoma presented as an adrenal which crisis while
very rare, would have been life threatening if missed. In addition adrenal hormone
replacement therapy was critical for toleration of subsequent chemotherapy,
ii) the case illustrates the importance of imaging the adrenals in cases of primary
adrenal insufficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP67
EP68
The frequency of tissue transglutaminase antibodies in the
monoglandular and polyglandular autoimmune endocrine disorders
Aysen Akkurt Kocaeli1, Soner Cander2, Ozen Oz Gul3, Pinar Sisman3,
Canan Ersoy3 & Erdinc Erturk3
1Bursa State Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;
2Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;3Uludag University Medical School,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Generally, symptoms of celiac disease is not accompanied when present together
with autoimmune endocrine diseases. In this study, we aimed to investigate the
prevalence of silent celiac disease in the APS and autoimmune monoglandular
disorders by measuring tissue transglutaminase antibodies (ttgAb).
Methods
A total  of
103  patients  with  monaglandular  or  polyglandular  autoimmune
endocrine disorders and 32 control subjects were enrolled in the study. At least the
existence of two diagnoses with type 1 diabetes, Addison’s disease, autoimmune
thyroid disease, vitiligo, pernicious anemia, hypoparathyroidism, gonadal failure
were considered APS and patients with only one of those type 1 diabetes,
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis or Addison’s disease were enrolled as monoglandular
endocrine disease. Serum samples were collected from patients and were studied
at one time for tissue transglutaminase antibodies.
Results
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis was present in the sixty-eight patients of 103 patients
including OPS and monoglandular endocrine disease, type 1 diabetes was in the
forty-four patients and Addison’s disease in the seventeen. In the 13 of 103
patients (12.6%) ttgAb IgA were positive and in the 8 of 103 (7.8%) ttgAb IgG
were positive but in the healthy control group both IgA or IgG antibodies were not
present. Highest rates of positive ttgAb IgA frequency was detected in the
Addison’s disease with 29.4% (5/17). It was 13.6%, in the type 1 diabetes, 8.8% in
the Hashimoto’s diasease and 16.7% in the APS. There were not observed
statistically significant difference between the groups and the ttgAb IgG positivity
was observed with lower rates.
Conclusion
The  prevalence  of  silent  celiac  disease  was  higher  in  the  patients  with
autoimmune  endocrine  disorders  when  compared  with  the  healthy  control
group. The frequency of ttgAb is not not higher in the APS then monoglandular
endocrine disorders and Addison’s disease likely has highest prevalence of silent
celiac disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP68
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP69
Hyperparathyroidism healing in patients treated for
hyperaldosteronism: three cases
Lourdes Garcia Blasco, Juan Carlos Ferrer Garcia, Mercedes
Tolosa Torrens, Pablo Sanz Revert, Cristian Marco Alacid &
Carlos Sánchez Juan
Hospital General Universitario de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
Introduction
Hyperaldosteronism usually presents with hypertension and hypokalemia;
however, there is recent evidence of a relationship with the parathyroid hormone.
There are different theories to try to explain this relationship. Hyperaldosteronism
treatment is medical or surgical depending upon etiology. We present three cases in
which treatment solely for hyperaldosteronism also cured hyperparathyroidism.
Materials and methods
We report three patients in whom hyperaldosteronism was diagnosed during 2015
and detected simultaneously hyperparathyroidism. We recorded epidemiological
data, pre- and post-surgical phospho-calcium metabolism, as well as hyper-
aldosteronism.
Results
Case 1: A 38 year old male was referred for suspected hyperaldosteronism. A
nodule was detected in left adrenal in TC image. Levels of PTH 150 pg/ml were
objectified with normal serum and urinary calcium and phosphorus. Levels of
vitamin  D  were
19.9 ng/ml.  After  left  adrenalectomy,  PTH  levels  were
normalized. Case 2: A 55 years old woman referred for study of hypokalemia.
Her PTH levels were 162 pg/ml with normal serum phosphorus and urinary
calcium.  Lesion
20 mm  in  left  adrenal  was  detected  in  TC  image.  After
adrenalectomy, PTH levels down to 34 pg/ml. Case 3: A 63 years old woman was
referred to rule out hyperaldosteronism. She presented PTH levels of 136 pg/ml
and normal levels of serum calcium and phosphorus. Vitamin D levels were
24 ng/ml. MRI image showed right adrenal injury that was removed. After
surgery, PTH levels diminished.
Conclusions
In cases of primary hyperaldosteronism is advisable to assess the phospho-
calcium metabolism, especially PTH. The effect of hyperaldosteronism on bone
long-term is still unknown. In any case, the calcium/phosphorus levels were not
pathological.  Sometimes  treatment  solely  of  hyperaldosteronism  can  simul-
taneously treat hyperparathyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP69
EP70
Large aortic aneurism and left coronary artery calcifications: incidental
findings at adrenal incidentaloma assessment
Mara Carsote1, Mariana Dobrescu1, Anda Dumitrascu2, Adriana Gruia3,
Ana Valea4 & Adina Ghemigian1
1C. Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy & C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;3Medlife Center,
Bucharest, Romania;4I. Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy &
Clinical County Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction
In cases with high-risk metabolic profile the investigations may lead to the
discovery of an adrenal tumor (AT). Complex endocrine investigations including
computed tomography (CT) scans may point anomalies of the vessels as coronary
artery or abdominal aorta.
Aim
We report a case associating an AT and severe cardiovascular anomalies which
are discovered during endocrine investigations.
Case data
A 72-year prior smoker male is known since the last decade with high blood
pressure, type 2 diabetes mellitus, stable angina, hyperlipemia. Although partially
compliant to the medication used for lowering arterial hypertension, a complex
cardiologic evaluation was performed for episodes of elevated blood pressure. An
abdominal ultrasound was used to evaluate the kidney status (consistent with mild
potassium elevation of 5.5 mmol/l, N:3.5-5.1 mmol/l) and a right AT of 2.4 cm
was found. Consecutive endocrine test were needed. On admission, a high uric
acid of 9 mg/dl (N:2.6-7.2 mg/dl) was consistent with increased metabolic risk.
The thyroid was normal, so was the plasma cortisol after screening dexametasone
suppression test (of 1.22 mUI/ml), the plasma chromogranin A (of 50 ng/ml;
N:20-125 ng/ml),  plasma  metanephrines
(of
15.22 pg/ml,  N:10-90 pg/ml),
plasma normetaneprines (of 36.8 pg/ml, N:15-180 pg/ml). An abdominal IV
contrast CT scan was used to confirm the echography findings. Right AT of
2.15/2.92/1.95 cm was found together with a right kidney cyst of 1.8 cm, an aortic
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
aneurism of 2.96 cm diameter having a length of 5.05-7.05 cm, a left coronary
artery  calcification  of
2.52 cm.  Doppler  ultrasound  also  confirmed  a  wall
thrombus at the level of aortic aneurism. Despite the non-secretor endocrine
profile, the vessel anomalies made necessary consecutive cardiac investigations
and  an  angio-magnetic  resonance  imagery  as  well  as  arterigraphy  was
recommended.
Conclusion
A multidisciplinary approach is necessary is patients with high blood pressure
uncontrolled by usual medication. Otherwise, the imagery scans performed for an
adrenal incidentaloma may lead to previously unknown incidental findings as
anomalies of large vessels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP70
EP71
From mild abdominal pain to large right adrenal cyst
Dana Moraru1, Corina Chirita1, Simona Tataru1, Ioana Trandafir2,
Mara Carsote3, Ana Valea4 & Razvan Petrescu5
1Medicover, Bucharest, Romania;2Medlife, Bucharest, Romania;
3C. Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy & C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;4I. Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy & Clinical County Hospita, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;5Military Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Cystic lesions of the adrenals are rare and they may develop asymptomatically for
a long period of time. Females seem to be more affected and lesion is typically
unilateral.
Aim
We report a case of young female case incidentally found with a large adrenal
pure cystic mass.
Case data
A 24-year non-smoking female patient with regular menses since the age of 14
complained of mild abdominal pain for a few days without correlation to prior
menses. Normal intestinal transit was presented and the specific analyzes infirmed
a urinary infection. An abdominal ultrasound detected a large cyst which first was
suspected to be connected with the liver. Computed tomography scan (with IV
contrast) revealed a large right adrenal cyst of 8 by 7 by 8.5 cm containing
homogenous  fluid,  encapsulated
(a  wall  of
0.2 cm)  with  a  parietal  micro-
calcification and a thin interior septus. The mass has contact with right kidney and
with sixth and seventh hepatic segments. Endocrine profile was assessed without
any anomalies: chromogranin A of 41 ng/ml (N: 20-125 ng/ml); neuron specific
enolase  of
4.54 ng/ml (N:
0-12 ng/ml),  plasma  metaneprines  of
40.2 pg/ml
(N: 10-90 pg/ml), plasma normetaneprines of 27.6 pg/ml (N: 15-180 pg/ml),
serum serotonin of 246.3 ng/ml (N: 80-450 ng/ml), circulating calcitonin of
0.5 pg/ml (N: 5.17-9.82 pg/ml), baseline ACTH of 45.98 pg/ml (N: 3-66 pg/ml),
baseline plasma morning cortisol of 29.42 mg/dl was suppressed after 1mg of
dexametasone to 1.4 mg/dl. Coagulation tests (as well as blood ionogram and
parasites assays) were within normal limits. Consecutive surgery was performed
and confirmed the benign features.
Conclusion
Large adrenal cysts are exceptional findings and their removal is necessary
because of local complication as pain, hemorrhage or infection. Some congenital
elements may be involved but they may develop up to the adult age without being
detected. Despite poorly suggestive clinical picture the prompt intervention is
needed especially in lesions with high dimensions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP71
EP72
Adrenal failure secondary to bilateral adrenal metastasis as a
presenting feature of lung cancer - a case report
Osman Sutcuoglu1, Basak Bolayir2, Muhittin Yalcin2, Hasan Satis1,
Alev Altinova2, Mujde Akturk2, Fusun Balos Toruner2 & Nuri Cakir2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology, Gazi University Faculty of
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Metastatic infiltration of the adrenal glands is a common finding of malignancies,
but few case reports showed primary adrenal insufficiency being the presenting
manifestation of underlying malignant tumors. Here, we report a case of adrenal
insufficiency secondary to metastases from lung adenocarcinoma.
A 69-year-old man was admitted to emergency department with weakness, altered
mental status, hypotension, fever and weight loss. He had 100 pack-year history
of smoking. At the time of presentation, physical examination revealed a blood
pressure of 80/40 mmHg, subfebrile fever of 37.28C and abdominal tenderness.
His skin was hyperpigmented and cachectic appearance was recorded. The initial
laboratory evaluation revealed hyperkalemia, hyponatremia and elevated
creatinine levels. During initial evaluation cardiac arrest occurred and the patient
was resuscitated successfully. Echocardiography showed massive pericardial
effusion. Pericardiocentesis was performed and biochemical analysis of pericardial
fluid showed exudate fluid characteristics. After blood samples were obtained for
adrenocorticotrophic hormone and cortisol measurement, intravenous methyl-
prednisolone and saline infusion were administered. After administration of steroid
therapy, patient status improved within a few hours. Serum cortisol and ACTH
were,  respectively,
0.4 mg/dl
(6.2-19.4 mg/dl)  and
716 pg/ml
(0-46 pg/ml).
Abdominal computed tomography revealed multiple lesions in both adrenals,
measuring 4 cm in greatest diameter. Thoracic computed tomography showed right
hilar mass and multiple mediastinal lymph nodes. Pulmonary adenocarcinoma was
diagnosed with transbronchial biopsy. Patient was switched to oral hydrocortisone
and  fludrocortisone  therapy.  He  was  referred  to  oncology  department  and
chemotherapy was planned for his primary disease.
Although metastasis to adrenal glands is relatively common, they are usually without
clinical significance. Moreover, adrenal deficiency is very rare. It should be kept in
mind that adrenal insufficiency may be associated with undiagnosed malignancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP72
EP73
Clinical case of yatrogenic hypercortisolism in pregnant woman with
adrenal insufficiency
Natalya Volkova, Mariya Porksheyan, Saida Kanaeva & Ilya Davidenko
Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia.
Background
Adrenal insufficiency (AI) in pregnant women is difficult to manage because of
similarity between clinics of decompensation of AI and gestational toxicosis.
Objective difficulty is absence of clinical guidelines of management of pregnant
patients with AI. We present a clinical case where the management of pregnant
patient was not careful, which led to overdose and iatrogenic hypercortisolism.
Clinical case
Pregnant woman, 29years old, asked second opinion about established diagnosis
and  treatment.  Her  complaints  were  high  blood  pressure,  face  edema,
hyperglycemia, weight gain. She was on 22 week of gestation. Anamnesis was
notable for AI, which was diagnosed few years ago. Before pregnancy she took
50 mg of hydrocortisone per day. When she became pregnant, the dose was
increased to100 mg/day because of fatigue and dizziness. From that moment her
condition worsened. She was seen by obstetrician, endocrinologist. Preeclampsia
and gestational diabetes were suspected, antihypertensive drugs and insulin were
prescribed. Patient was not sufficient with recommendations and asked about
second opinion. Firstly, she had AI with treatment by supraphysiological doses of
hydrocortisone, secondly, complaints developed after increased doses in first
trimester, when preeclampsia is not possible to happen. Diagnosis of iatrogenic
hypercortisolism was established. The dose of hydrocortisone was gradually
decreased to 25 mg/day, her condition became better in a few days. Insulin,
hypotensive drugs were stopped. In one month complaints disappeared. Her
obstetrician  was  consulted  by  experienced  endocrinologist  about  details  of
delivery and postpartum in women with AI.
Conclusion
In the first trimester treatment of AI may be difficult because symptoms of AI are
seen in pregnancy. It is easy to assign insufficient doses. At the same time, clinics
of iatrogenic hypercortisolism is similar to preeclampsia, the risk of overdose is
high. Because of absence of clinical guidelines, doctors must strictly follow to
existing recommendations in order to avoid such mistakes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP73
EP74
Adrenal insufficiency due to X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy diagnosed
in late adulthood
María Soledad Gogorza Pérez, Guillermo Serra Soler, Ana Jimenez Portilla,
Marzena Wos, Honorato García Fernández, In˜ aki Arguelles Jiménez,
Santiago Tofé Povedano, Mercedes Codina Marcet, Elena Mena Ribas &
Vicente Pereg Macazaga
Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a rare condition presented mainly in
males during childhood and early adulthood. It represents almost 10% of primary
adrenal insufficiency (PAI) or Addison’s disease cases.
Clinical case
A 67-year-old male was diagnosed at the age of 61 with PAI during testing for
mesenteric paniculitis while admitted in Internal Medicine service. He was
treated with hydrocortisone and referred to outpatient endocrinology clinic. The
patient did not attend and restarted follow-up 6 years later. His past medical
history included dyslipidemia, anxiety and parkinson-like syndrome since 2012.
He was taking hydrocortisone 20-5-5 mg, with no mineralocorticoid. He had
normal blood pressure with no significant changes between supine and orthostatic
position.  Blood  tests  showed  normal  levels  of  serum  sodium,  potassium,
testosterone  and  renine.  Aldosterone  was  in  the  lower  limit  of  normality.
21-hidroxilase antibodies were negative and the abdominal CT scan showed
normal adrenal glands. Due to the normality of these two tests, plasma levels of
very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) were assessed. They were elevated. Genetic
study demonstrated a mutation in the ABCD1 gene. Skin biopsy revealed high
levels of VLCFA in fibroblasts and low levels of ALD protein. MRI of the brain
showed no alterations in the white matter. The patient had a 24 year old son and a
30 year old daughter who wanted children. She presented high levels of plasma
VLCFA and the genetic study showed a mutation in the ABCD1 gene too. She
was referred to genetic counseling.
Conclusion
To consider X-ALD in males diagnosed with PAI at any age because of its
implications, one very important being the transmission to offspring.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP74
EP75
Massive bilateral pheocromocytomas - a rare case
Diana Martins, Dírcea Rodrigues, Carla Baptista, Miguel Melo,
Luís Cardoso, Nuno Vicente, Diana Oliveira, Mara Ventura, Adriana Lages
& Francisco Carrilho
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department of Coimbra
University Hospital Centre, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Pheochromocytoma is a rare catecholamine-secreting tumor that arises from the
chromaffin tissue of the adrenal medulla. Of the reported cases, only 10% consist
in bilateral lesions and the probability of multiple endocrine neoplasia should
always be investigated.
Case report
Female patient, 19 years old, presented with a clinical history with 2 years of
evolution, characterized by episodes of palpitations, headache and abdominal
discomfort.
It was performed ultrasound study that showed ‘bilateral cystic perirenal lesions’
and after that, abdominal CT confirmed ‘cystic adrenal formations, the right with
11.3 cm and the left with 7.8 cm of larger diameter, without infiltrative aspects.’
Analitycal  evaluation: serum metanephrines
7386.4 pg/ml (!60), calcitonin
55 pg/ml (!10) and PTH 41 pg/ml (9-72). The 123I-MIBG scintigraphy showed
‘massive bilateral pheochromocytomas and abnormal fixation on the topography
of the left thyroid lobe’. Cervical plus thoracic CT confirmed a thyroid nodule on
the left lobe, with larger diameter of 1.1 cm, without other lesions. Histological
result of thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy: thyroid medullary carcinoma.
Patient  underwent  bilateral  laparoscopic  adrenalectomy  and  after  that  total
thyroidectomy with central lymph node dissection, both without complications.
Anatomopathological study revealed bilateral benign pheochromocytomas (Ki67
2%) and medullary carcinoma of the thyroid T1bN0M0;R0.
Genetic analysis confirmed mutation c.2080 TOC in exon 11 of the RET gene,
consistent with a diagnosis of MEN2A; genetic study of relatives in the first
degree was negative.
Currently, the patient is clinically stable and presented: calcitonin !2.0 pg/ml
(!10),  PTH
32 pg/ml
(9-72),  calcium
9.5 mg/dl
(8.8-10.6)  and  serum
metanephrines 47.2 pg/ml (!60).
Conclusions
In the presence of bilateral adrenal tumors and young age, multiple endocrine
neoplasia probability is higher, and should be carried out biochemical, imaging
and genetic investigation. If confirmed, genetic evaluation of first degree relatives
should be performed. Furthermore, because of the high possibility of recurrence,
these patients should maintain close and long-term monitoring.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP75
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP76
A rare case of ectopic ACTH syndrome originated from malignant renal
paraganglioma
Esra Tutal1, Demet Yılmazer1, Taner Demirci1, Erman Cakal1,
Evrim Cakir1, Bahadir Celep1, Oya Topaloglu1 & Tuncay Delibasi2
1Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit Teaching and Research Hospital, Ankara,
Turkey;2Kastamonu University school of Medicine, Kastamonu, Turkey.
Introduction
Ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) syndrome is characterized by
hypercortisolism due to the hypersecretion of non-pituitary ACTH-secreting
tumor leads to the Cushing’s syndrome. Herein, we present a case with Cushing’s
syndrome, which is diagnosed ACTH-secreting renal malignant paraganglioma.
Case
A 40-year-old woman presented with a 5 month history of newly diagnosed
hypertension  and  diabetes,  weakness,  hyperpigmentation,  oligomenorrhea,
hirsutism and acneiform lesions. She showed cushingoid features including
moon face, facial hirsutism, facial and truncal acne, hyperpigmentation and
severe muscle weakness of the limbs. She had not the findings including striae,
supraclavicular fat accumulation and buffalo hump. Laboratory examination
showed the presence of hypopotasemia, hyperglycemia, hyperthyroidism and
leukocytosis. Serum levels of ACTH, cortisol and the urine free cortisol were
markedly  elevated.  Cortisol  value  after  an  overnight
2 mg  dexamethasone
suppression test was 46.1 mcg/dl and there were no suppression after 2 day 8 mg
dexamethasone  administration.  Magnetic  resonance  imaging
(MRI)  of  the
pituitary gland indicated two microadenomas. An abdominal MRI scan revealed
horseshoe kidney, bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and a mass with dimensions of
35!31 mm in the left kidney. Inferior petrosal sinus sampling showed no
evidence for a central to peripheral gradient of ACTH. A positron emission
tomography/computed tomography scan was showed intense increased activity in
the lower pole of left kidney. Left adrenalectomy and left partial nephrectomy
were performed. The resected tumor were diagnosed as the ACTH-secreting
paraganglioma  in  the  pathological  examination  that  was  confirmed  by
immunohistochemical studies with chromogranin, synaptophysin and ACTH
The periadrenal lymph node was evaluated as a metastatic lymph node.
Conclusion
Only few cases of paragangliomas as the cause of the ectopic ACTH syndrome
have been reported. To the best of our knowlege, this is the first case of renal
malignant paraganglioma resulting in Cushing’s syndrome due to the ectopic
ACTH hypersecretion.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP76
EP77
Adrenal venous sampling is useful for a definitive diagnosis in Cushing’s
syndrome with bilateral adrenal tumors
Toshiro Seki1, Atsushi Yasuda1, Natsumi Kitajima1, Masami Seki2,
Masayuki Oki1, Atsushi Takagi1 & Masafumi Fukagawa1
1Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara-shi, Kanagawa-ken, Japan;
2Seirei Numazu Hospital, Numazu-shi, Shizuoka-ken, Japan.
We report three cases of Cushing’s syndrome (CS) with bilateral adrenal tumors.
When bilateral adrenal tumors are encountered, the differential diagnosis is
difficult, especially in the functioning bilateral adrenocortical adenoma. Adrenal
scintigraphy has become a standard technique to determine the laterality of
excessive hormone secretion; however,  this examination results in bilateral
adrenal activity in the functioning bilateral adrenocortical adenoma. Our three
patients were diagnosed with adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-independent
CS based on biochemical testing, and an abdominal computed tomography (CT)
scan detected bilateral adrenal tumors. Adrenal scintigraphy, which has become a
standard technique to determine the laterality of excessive hormone secretion,
showed bilateral adrenal activity in all cases. However, adrenal venous sampling
(AVS) demonstrated three different hormone-excess patterns (case 1: bilateral
cortisol-excess secretions; case 2: unilateral cortisol-excess secretion and bilateral
aldosterone-excess secretions; and case 3: bilateral cortisol-excess secretions and
bilateral aldosterone-excess secretions). Based on these findings, we could select
optimal treatment for each case. Therefore, AVS is useful to obtain a definitive
diagnosis and adequate therapy for CS with bilateral adrenal tumors. Moreover,
there is no consensus regarding the optimal determination of the laterality of
excessive cortisol secretion. Thus, standardized criteria for AVS in CS with
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
bilateral adrenal tumors needed to obtain the optimal determination of the
laterality of excessive hormone secretion. In this regard, our cases demonstrated
detailed data including CT scans, adrenal scintigraphy, confirmatory tests for
primary aldosteronism and pathological findings in addition to AVS. Therefore,
our report may be used to formulate standard criteria for AVS in CS with bilateral
adrenal tumors in the near future.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP77
EP78
Non functional unilateral giant adrenal myelolipoma: a case report
Ferhat Gokay1, Yasin Simsek1, Tamer Ertan2 & Ebru Akay3
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kayseri Training and
Research Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey;2Department of General Surgery,
Kayseri Training and Research Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey;3Department of
Pathology, Kayseri Training and Research Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey.
Introduction
Adrenal myelolipoma is a rare benign tumour composed of mature adipose tissue
and hematopoietic tissue. Most lesions are small and asymptomatic, discovered
incidentally during autopsy or on imaging studies performed for other reasons.
Usually small and asymptomatic, but has been reported to present with symptoms
such as abdominal pain resulting from tumour bulk, necrosis or spontaneous
retroperitoneal haemorrhage.
Case 54-year old woman who presented with a giant abdominal mass and
abdominal pain. The dimensions of the mass on MRI scan were as follows, 8.8 cm
(cranio-caudal) !5.2 cm (antero-posterior)!6.3 cm (medio-lateral). The retro-
peritoneal tumor was resected, and a giant adrenal myelolipoma was diagnosed by
pathological examination.
Conclusion
Adrenal myelolipoma are rare non functioning benign tumors, which can be
observed expectantly with surgical resection reserved for larger or symptomatic
lesions to prevent the occurrence of a rupture or intratumoral haemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP78
EP79
Large bilateral adrenal metastatic melanoma
Blertina Dyrmishi1, Taulant Olldashi1, Elvana Rista1, Eneida Hoxha1,
Entela Puca2, Thanas Fureraj2 & Agron Ylli2
1Hygeia Hospital Tirana, Tirana, Albania;2UHC “Mother Teresa”, Tirana,
Albania.
Background
Adrenal metastatic melanoma can be found in up to 50% of patients with
melanomas. These tumors are not hormone-secreting, and they usually present
with locally advanced disease.
The case
We report on the presence of a bilateral massive metastatic adrenal melanoma in a
56-year old woman with the initial clinical diagnosis of bilateral adrenal cyst or
hemorrhage, and chronic adrenal failure. The patient underwent surgery one
month before the admission to our hospital, left laparotomic adrenalectomy, for a
big tumor in the left adrenal gland 9.6!10 cm. Histological assessment of the left
adrenalectomy misdiagnosed an adrenal carcinoma. Since the patient had chronic
adrenal  failure,  the treatment  before and after  surgery with hydrocortisone
20 mg/day was started.
One month after the surgery she was admitted to our hospital with weight loss,
fatigue, and multiple mucocutaneus nodules.
Abdominal CT scan: Multiple liver and spleen metastasis and a large metastasis in
the right adrenal gland 9.5!10 cm.
Lab Data: ACTH 165 pg/ml (normal range 10-65); Morning serum cortisol
values 1.0 g/dl (normal range 3.4-12.5); FBC: WBC 9260; RBC 4.100.000; Hb
10.4 gr/dl; PTC 371.000; ESR 30 mm/h; Calcium 9.2 mg/dl.
ICH of mucocutaneus nodules and reexamination of biopsy of left adrenalectomy:
malignant melanoma.
Total Body Scan with Tc99: Multiple metastasis in the large bone and ribs.
Conclusions
Melanoma metastasis to adrenal gland generally has a poor prognosis. Patients
with adrenal metastases from melanoma, either isolated or with a limited number
of  additional  metastases,  may  achieve  a  survival  benefit  from  surgery,
unfortunately the diagnosis of our case was made in an advanced state and the
patient continued only with symptomatic therapy.
Keywords: bilateral adrenal metastasis chronic adrenal failure melanoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP79
EP80
Cushing syndrome with ectopic secretion of ACTH by a lung carcinoma
Elena Moravcˇíková, Michal Kulich, Helena Urbánková, Juliana Gregová &
Peter Va
ˇ uga
National Institute of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Lubochna, Slovakia.
Introduction
A form of ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome is an ectopic production of
ACTH. The aetiology can by benign lesion or a malignant non-pituitary tumor,
which is more common. The prevalence of endogenous Cushing syndrome is 1 in
26 000. Ectopic ACTH secretion is responsible for 7-15% of the cases. Principal
position of the ACTH-producing tumor is in lungs - a bronchial endocrine tumor
and small cell lung cancer. Small peripheral bronchial carcinoids can easily be
missed by CT examination of the chest. MRI and octreotide scintigraphy are
of little value to identify these small forms of bronchial carcinoid (33-44% of
tumors are missed).
Case report
We report a case of ectopic ACTH syndrome caused by a lung carcinoma in a
37-year-old male patient with clinical features of Cushing syndrome, serious
hypokalemia  and  hypercortisolismu.  Clinical  investigation  confirmed  the
diagnosis of ectopic ACTH production. We performed 2 mg dexamethasone
suppression  test  which  showed  no  suppression.  In
8 mg  dexamethasone
suppression test was only parcial suppression present. Sampling from sinus
petrosus inferior showed an ectopic cause of hypercortisolism. PET CT scan of
the chest showed a solitary deposit (14 mm) in upper right lobe of lungs. The
deposition showed only a slight metabolic activity. Consequent thoracotomy and
histological examination of the tissue confirmed a primary lung carcinoma. After
the extirpation was detraction syndrome present. The treatment consisted of
glucocorticoids supplementation with sequential reduction of the dose. Clinical
and laboratory features of Cushing syndrome detracted as well. The time period
from the first diagnostic tests to the surgical extirpation of the tumor was very
short (!4 months).
Conclusions
Localisation of the source of ectopic ACTH can be problematic. Surgery of
tumour is normally curative, but it should be performed as soon as possible. Very
rapid diagnosis followed by curative surgery prevented the onset of complications
connected with hypercortisolemia and also lung cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP80
EP81
Asynchronous bilateral adrenal masses: from surgery to endocrine
follow-up
Ana Valea1,2, Irina Ciocan2, Dan Dumitru Pop4, Mara Carsote3,
Iulia Muntean2, Cristina Ghervan1,2 & Carmen Emanuela Georgescu1,2
1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;2Endocrinology Clinic, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;3Carol Davila
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest and C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;4Department of
Radiotherapy, Prof. Dr Ion Chiricuta Oncology Institute Cluj-Napoca,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Cushing’s syndrome (CS) is correlated with prolonged exposure to high levels of
glucocorticoid hormones. Although the most common cause is exogenous adrenal
tumors incidentally discovered (incidentaloma) may underline CS.
Material and method
This is a case presentation of an adult patient. Specific tests for CS have been
used: morning plasma cortisol and circadian rhythm, plasma ACTH, testosterone,
dexamethasone (DXM) suppression test.
Case presentation
A 50-year male associating diabetes mellitus and hypertension, was admitted for
very high blood pressure and centripet obesity. Clinical examination revealed:
moon face, plethora, telangiectasia. Normal thyroid tests were found, a morning
plasma cortisol of 145.4 ng/ml (N:70-225 ng/ml) with normal circadian rhythm,
ACTH  of  10.6 pg/ml  (N:7-46 pg/ml)  and  a  total  plasma  testosterone  of
2.46 ng/ml (N:0.2-0.75 ng/ml). Lack of suppression at 1 mg DXM overnight
test established CS diagnosis of adrenal etiology (a right adrenal tumor of 39 mm
was identified at CT scan). The tumor was removed and after surgery clinical
improvement was associated with a morning cortisol of 18.99 ng/ml 18 days after
surgery and a level of 12.55 ng/ml 3 months later. 9 months after surgery,
endocrine evaluation indicated a raise of morning plasma cortisol with normal
ACTH  and suppression at  DXM  test.  CT  detected  a left  adrenal  mass  of
24/20/13 mm.  Given  the  results  of  endocrine  evaluation  suggesting  an
incidentaloma, follow-up was recommended.
Conclusions
Adrenal incidentaloma management varies on symptoms, size, lateralization, etc.
The  pathogenic  traits  in  asynchronous  bilateral  adrenal  masses  are  still
incompletely understood.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP81
EP82
Adrenocortical carcinoma: report of four cases
Mariana Tomé Fernández-Ladreda1, Guillermo Martínez De Pinillos2 &
Fernando García2
1Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospitalpunta De Europa, Algeciras
(CÁDIZ), Spain;2Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital De Valme, Sevilla,
Spain.
Introduction
Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a very rare neoplasm with an incidence of
about one case per million population. It is an agressive tumor (overall 5-year
survival 16-38%) and complete resection is the only curative treatment.
Description of methods
We report four cases of ACC. The clinical and biochemical features at diagnosis
along with clinical course of the disease are discussed.
Results
Four patients (three female). Mean age at diagnosis 31G14.5 years. Incidentally
discovered mass in 50% of cases. CT-scan was the initial imaging test in all cases.
Median size 9.23 cm (above 8 cm in all patients). Three patients had functioning
tumors (Case 1 hypercortisolism; case 2 hypercortisolism and hyperandrogenism;
case 3 hypercortisolism and hyperaldosteronism). Initial Stage was II in three
cases and IV in another case. 75% of patients presented local recurrence after
surgery.  Two  of  three  cases  with  Stage  II  at  diagnosis  developed  distant
metastases along the clinical course of the disease.
100% of patients with
advanced disease had lung metastases. All patients were treated with Mitotane
after surgical resection. Three pacients were also treated with chemotherapy (one
patient received Etoposide, Doxorubicin and cisplatine; another pacient received
Vinorelbine). One patient with bone metastases was treated with palliative
radiotherapy. Two patients are still alive (both diagnosed at Stage II). One of them
is free of illness alter 41 months. The other patient diagnosed 56 months ago has
presented local recurrence and lung and bone metastases. Mean survival in
deceased patients was 24G13 months.
Conclusions
ACC are neoplasms with low rate of survival. Stage at diagnosis is related with
prognosis. As we can observe in our sample most ACC are functioning. Clinical
and radiological features may help in differential diagnosis between benign
adenomas  and  ACC,  being  size  one  of  the  most  important  predictors  of
malignancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP82
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP83
Depression and acute kidney injury - unusual presentation of Addison’s
disease
Sajjad Ahmad, Naveed Khalily, Petros Vernavos & Laxmi
Narsimharao Bondugulapati
Diabetes and Endocrine Department, Wrexham Maelor Hospital, Wrexham,
North Wales, UK.
Introduction
Addison’s disease is the commonest cause of primary hypoadrenalism in the
western world. Here, we discuss a case of Addison’s with unusual presentation.
Case report
A 39-year-old woman with no previous mental health problems was admitted
with history of worsening depression over the last 15 months following her
divorce. She had low mood and anhedonia in spite of sertraline for more than a
year. This was associated with 40 kg weight loss. She was on Beclomethasone
and salbutamol inhalers for her asthma. She was cachectic and was profoundly
hypotensive.  Systemic  examination  was  unremarkable.  Her  biochemistry
revealed electrolyte abnormalities typical of Addison’s but she also had acute
kidney injury with Creatinine 339 mmol/l (NR: 64-104). Hypoadrenalism was
suspected  which  was  confirmed  by  random  cortisol  of  only
3 nmol/l.
Commencement of hydrocortisone and IV fluid replacement led to clinical
(including depression) and biochemical improvement. Subsequent investigations
showed a high ACTH 24.8 ng/l (NR: 7-63) and positive anti-adrenal antibodies
confirming the diagnosis of Addison’s disease. She was discharged home on
hydrocortisone and Fludrocortisone.
Conclusion
Addison’s patients presenting predominantly with psychiatric symptoms is rare.
The etiology of the neuropsychiatric symptoms remains unknown, but may
involve electrophysiological, electrolyte and metabolic abnormalities, glucocor-
ticoid deficiency, and high endorphins. Our case was particularly difficult as it
was complicated by other elements (divorce) which appeared like the aetiology of
depression for the treating primary care physicians. This highlights the fact that
the clinicians should have high index of suspicion to look for other causes, if the
depression is not responding to the usual antidepressants. Our patient also had
acute kidney injury at presentation. About 55% of patients do have a degree of
azotaemia but very few have been reported with such a drastic deterioration in
renal function. The electrolyte abnormalities in Addison’s disease could easily be
attributed to AKI and therefore physicians need to be vigilant.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP83
Adrenal medulla
EP84
Pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma: Histopathological features as clue
to the underlying germline mutation in these genetically heterogeneous
tumors
Maitrayee Roy, Shipra Agarwal, Mehar Chand Sharma, Poonam Gupta,
M L Khurana, Rajesh Khagawat & Nikhil Tandon
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
Introduction
Pheochromocytomas (PHEOs) and paragangliomas (PGLs) are rare neuroendo-
crine tumors arising from chromaffin cells within adrenal medulla and autonomic
paragranglia respectively. Recent evidences show that nearly one-third patients
harbour germline mutation, namely in von Hippel-Lindau (VHL), REarranged
during Transfection
(RET), neurofibromatosis type
1
(NF 1) and succinate
dehydrogenase (SDH) complex genes. However, the tumor morphology arising in
various syndromes has been scarcely documented. Can histology provide a clue to
the genotype or more importantly help to target patients, especially with clinically
sporadic tumors, who would require genetic testing?
Methods
We tested 63 (40 PHEOs, 20 PGLs, three both PHEOs and PGLs) consenting
patients for germline mutation in VHL, RET or SDH genes. The corresponding
tumor histology (available in 41) is evaluated by two pathologists blinded to the
mutation status.
Results
Germline mutations have been detected in 37 (58.73%) patients; 11, 8, 16 and 2
with VHL, RET, SDHB and SDHD gene mutations respectively. The tumors in
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 have large cells with abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm, frequent hyaline globules,  anisonucleosis  and scant vascularised
stroma in septa. The VHL-mutated tumors are stroma-rich, contain vessels in
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
septa as well as admixed with cells which are medium to large, often having clear
cytoplasm, fairly uniform nuclei and presence of background adrenomedullary
hyperplasia (AMH). The SDH-mutated tumors, much akin to the sporadic ones,
show diverseness in morphological appearance.
Conclusions
A vessel and stroma rich tumor with at least focal cytoplasmic clearing may hint
to the possibility of an underlying VHL mutation in an apparently sporadic tumor.
AMH is important corroborative evidence that must be diligently looked for both
in gross specimens and histology sections. Likewise MEN 2 associated tumors
display histological features that in conjunction may prompt to test for its
presence. Histological heterogeneity, however, precludes successful prediction
of SDH mutation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP84
EP85
Clinical review of patients with pheochromocytoma diagnosed between
2011 and 2015
Maria Kurowska, Anna Oszywa-Chabros, Joanna Malicka & Jerzy S Tarach
Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland.
Introduction
WHO classification of endocrine tumors defines pheochromocytoma as a tumor
arising from chromaffin cells in the adrenal medulla. Almost all pheochromo-
cytomas produce catecholamines. An annual incidence of this tumor in the
general population is estimated at 3-8 cases/million/year. 40-50% of patients
with pheochromocytoma are characterized by sustained hypertension, a similar
percentage - only by paroxysmal hypertension and up to 10% are normotensive.
Aim
The aim of the study was to identify the most common clinical, hormonal and
imaging characteristics of the patients with pheochromocytoma hospitalized in
our department between 2011 and 2015, based on retrospective analysis of their
medical histories.
Results
The whole group covered 27 patients with confirmed pheochromocytomas. 21
patients (12M; 9F) aged 29-77 years (54.4G16.1) have been diagnosed since the
beginning of the disease in our department, while the remaining were originally
diagnosed and operated on in other centers. In three cases (14.3%) in the same
family, finally recognized as MEN 2A, tumors were bilateral. In three patients
pheochromocytoma was diagnosed as adrenal incydentaloma. In 18 patients the
tumor  was  one-sided  (the  nine  cases  in  the  left  and  right  adrenal  gland).
Hypertension, mainly paroxysmal, occurred in 13 patients (62%). Adrenal tumor
was initially detected in CT in 13 cases, in ultrasound in five and in MRI in two
patients. The largest tumor diameter ranged from 10 to 106 mm (mean 48,5G
25.1). Initial tumor CT density ranged between 7 and 51 HU (mean 29.2G12.2)
and in all ten patients who underwent contrast CT (“adrenal protocol”) a delayed
tumor washout index has been detected. Metoxycatecholamines excretion in daily
urine ranged from 100 to 3438 mg.
Conclusion
Paroxysmal hypertension, unilateral location, tumor greatest dimension greater
than 4 cm, high basal density and low washout index in CT were the most
common clinical features of pheochromocytomas in our group of patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP85
EP86
Diagnostic tools for incidental pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma
Akiyuki Kawashima, Kentaro Okamoto, Aya Amano, Hiroyuki Murabe &
Toshihiko Yokota
Kurashiki Central Hospital, Kurashiki, Okayama, Japan.
Introduction
Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma are the cause of secondary hypertension,
glucose intolerance, arteriosclerosis and associated with increase of mortality. In
addition, 10-17% of them are reported to be malignant. Therefore, diagnosis at
the early stage is important.
Methods
We retrospectively analyzed the medical records of Japanese patients who were
admitted to our hospital from January 2001 to December 2015. They were
confirmed  pheochromocytoma  or  paraganglioma  pathologically.  We  also
evaluated the postoperative clinical course. The median follow-up period was
5.5years (ranged 3 months - 15years).
Forty-eight patients were identified. Forty-five of 48 (94%) cases were referred as
incidentaloma.  Our  diagnostic  protocol  included
24-h  urine  fractionated
metanephrines
(24 h-UMN),
123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine  scintigraphy
(MIBG),  and  clonidine  suppression  test
(CST).  The  cut-off  values  of
24 h-UMN were 0.4 mg/day for metanephrine, and 0.9 mg/day for normeta-
nephrine, respectively. 24 h-UMN and MIBG were performed in all cases. CST
was conducted in 34 cases.
Results
Seventeen of 34 cases (50%) were positive for all three examinations. Fifteen
cases (31%) were negative for 24 h-UMN. Among these cases, MIBG was
positive in 12 cases (80%). CST was positive in 11 of 12 cases (92%). Surgical
intervention was carried out when either 24 h-UMN or MIBG was positive.
Surprisingly, no recurrence was found, during a follow-up period, though two
cases had tumors with capsule invasion. We found better prognosis in our cohort
contrary to recent reviews. We can propose two explanations. First, the rate of
incidental pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma was higher than previous report
by Kopetschke et al. who described that it was 59 of 201 (29%). Secondly, our
protocol  of  examination  gave  us  a  chance  to  diagnose  incidentaloma  as
pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma early on.
Conclusion
The combination of 24 h-UMN, MIBG, and CST may enable us to diagnose
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma at the early stage, which may reduce the
recurrence and mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP86
EP87
Importance of long term follow up in pheochromocytoma
Dhiya eddine Bellarbi, Said Azzoug, Leyla Rabehi & Farida Chentli
Department of Endocrine and metabolic diseases, Bab El Oued Teaching
Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are rare but life threatening tumors
secreting catecholamines. They could be either sporadic or inherited. Either
isolated or integrated in genetic syndromes such as Von Hippel Lindau (VHL)
(OMIM193300)  which  is  an  autosomal  dominant  disorder  resulting  from
germline mutations in the VHL gene.
Observation
We  report  a
42-year-old  man  operated  at
8
years  old  for  bilateral
pheochromocytoma revealed by adrenergic symptoms and high blood pressure.
Unfortunately, at that period he did not have any genetic testing. However, there
were not clinical clues for a genetic syndrome. At the age of 42, he had
neurological manifestations and chronic diarrhea.
Clinical examination showed a static cerebellar syndrome and central vestibular
syndrome.
Cerebral  MRI  showed  supra  and  infra-tentorial  lesions  deemed  to  be
hemangioblastomas.  The  largest  lesion  was  located  in  the  left  cerebello-
protuberancial area and measured 37!45!33 mm for which he underwent
neurosurgery.  Pathology  examination  confirmed  the  diagnosis  of  cerebellar
haemangioblastoma.  Abdominal  Computed  Tomography
(CT)  revealed
03
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) and a 12 mm mesenteric nodule
presenting as a homogenously and typical (NET). The largest PNET had intensive
fixation at octreoscan. Ophthalmologic examination revealed retinal hemangio-
blastoma.  The  diagnosis  of  VHL  was  therefore  clinically  made.  Familial
investigation revealed the same syndromic VHL in one sibling who had bilateral
pheochromocytoma  in  his  infancy  and  who  is  now  followed  for  retinal
hemangioblastomas associated to cerebellar hemangioblastomas. Genetic testing
would be extremely useful to determine which individuals from his family are
harboring the mutated allele.
Conclusion
Patients operated on for pheochromocytoma especially young ones should have
genetic screening in order to diagnose genetic syndromes which require a specific
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
and a multidisciplinary approach for the diagnosis and treatment of all associated
tumors and lesions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP87
EP88
High prevalence of germinal mutations in pheochromocytomas with
normal urinary metanephrines results
João Silva1, Susana Prazeres2, Rita Domingues2, Ana Font2 &
Valeriano Leite2
1Portuguese Armed Forces University Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal;2Instituto
Português de Oncologia Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
Pheochromocytomas are tumors derived from the adrenal-medullary chromaffin
cells  that  normally  produce  catecholamines.  Rarely  these  tumors  are  non-
secreting.  In  the  assessment  of  a  suspected  pheochromocytoma,  guidelines
recommend dosing urinary or plasma metanephrines.
Objective
To evaluate the prevalence of pheochromocytomas biochemically non-secreting
and their differences.
Methods
We searched all patients with measurements of metanephrines made in an
endocrinology department since 1999 (when Clinical Pathology was computer-
ized). We included all those who had performed adrenalectomy in this institution
with pheochromocytoma histology. Urinary metanephrines were measured with
spectrophotometric chromatographic method (Pisano).
Results
We analyzed 2336 results of urinary metanephrines. 190 were excluded because it
was results from outside patients and therefore could not be correlated clinically.
The 2146 results corresponded to 1211 patients, with 37 pheochromocytomas
analyzed. 13 cases of pheochromocytoma were excluded due to measurements of
metanephrines only after surgery. Of the 24 patients, eight had normal values.
Of these, three had positive values after analytical revaluation, (two with tumor
!1 cm and 1 with R3 cm), one had positive values at diagnosis, with a normal
value under methyltyrosine and phenoxybenzamine, four patients always had
negative values: two with SDHB mutation (tumors O3 cm), one with SDHC
mutation (12 cm) and the other with MEN2a (1.5 cm).
All patients had negative assay results also negative vanil-lmandelic acid.
Conclusion
The authors argue that pheochromocytomas may have normal values when they
have diameters !1.5 cm or when they have mutations that might interfere with
the production of catecholamines (ex: SDHB). Our study reveals the need for
repeated measurements of metanephrines, to exclude pheochromocytoma, in the
presence of an adrenal tumor in imaging, when the initial measurement is
negative.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP88
EP89
A novel RET mutation presented with VHL-like clinical manifestation
Euidal Jung & EonJu Jeon
Daegu Catholic University Hospital, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
Abstract withdrawn.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP90
A case of ectopic Cushing syndrome due to pheocromositoma
Askin Gungunes1, Senay Arikan Durmaz1,
Aydin Cifci2, Esra Erden3, Merve Tas2 & Selim Yalcin4
1Department of Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Kirikkale University,
Kirikkale, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine,
Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Department of Pathology, School
of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey;4Department of
Oncology, School of Medicine, Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey.
Background and aim
Pheochromocytoma, is a catecholamine-producing tumor, may rarely secrete
other hormones such as adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). We aimed to
report a rare case of ectopic cushing syndrome due to malignant pheochromo-
cytoma.
Case report
A 42-year-old man admitted to outpatient clinic with headache, irritability,
vomiting, nausea, and palpitation. He had paroxysmal hypertension and urinary
fractionated metanephrines were measured approximately 30 times higher than
the upper limit of normal, during the hypertension attack. Abdominal computed
tomography showed 43!62!78 mm mass lesion in the right adrenal gland and
lymphadenopathy in the right para-aortic area. Endocrinological examinations
demonstrated ectopic ACTH production and hypercortisolemia without overt
symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome. He was operated for right adrenal mass
following appropriate medical preparation. Postoperative pathology revealed that
malignant,metastatic pheochromocytoma. Immunohistochemistry was performed
and revealed that positive staining for ACTH.
Conclusions
Patients with pheochromocytoma also should have tests to exclude excess cortisol
secretion.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  most  pheochromocytoma  causes
hypercortisolemia due to secreting ectopic ACTH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP90
EP91
Neurofibromatosis type 1 associated with pheochromocytoma
Tensim Slim, Manel Jemel, Hanen Sayadi, Hela Marmouch, Sameh Graja &
Ines Khochtali
Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine in Fattouma Bourguiba
University Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia.
Introduction
Neurofibromatosis
1
(NF1)  or  von  Recklighausen  disease  is  an  autosomal
condition caused by heterozygous mutations of the NF1 gene. Patients with NF-1
are at an approximately fourfold higher risk of developing tumors than the general
population. Pheochromocytoma may occur in about 1% of these patients.
Case report
A 24-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for further examinations of a
6-cm  right  adrenal  mass,  that  was  incidentally  discovered  by  abdominal
ultrasonography during examinations for asthenia and weight-loss and confirmed
by abdominal computed tomographic scans and magnetic resonance imaging.
Family medical history revealed that the father had a NF-1. In her past medical
history, the patient had many episodes of palpitation, sweating and headache one
year before and she was diagnosed to have hypertension one month back. Physical
examination revealed signs of NF1. She had multiple café-au-lait spots on the
trunk and extremities and skinfold freckling. Bilateral opthalmic examination
revealed no Lisch nodules. Urinary catecholamines were markedly increased.
The treatment with b-blockers and alpha-blockers kept the patient asymptomatic.
Right suprarenalectomy was successfully preformed  and the anatomopatho-
logical  examination  of  the  surgical  sample  confirmed  the  diagnosis  of
pheochromocytoma.
Conclusion
Our case highlights the role of screening for pheochromocytoma in all patients
of neurofibromatosis wich deserves attention especially with the presence of
hypertension.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP91
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP92
Clinical case of giant pheochromocytoma with low hormonal activity
Natalya Volkova1, Dmitriy Beltsevitch2, Mariya Porksheyan1,
Saida Kanaeva1 & Ilya Davidenko1
1Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia;2Endocrinology
Research Center, Moscow, Russia.
Background
Pheochromocytoma (Ph) is the tumor that is fatal if do not suspect and treat it on
time. It is supposed that size of tumor is correlated with its synthetic activity. Here
we present a clinical case of giant Ph with low synthetic activity that could have
been recognized as adrenal cancer, which, in turn, may have led to wrong treatment.
Clinical case
Young woman, 28 years old, presented with the adrenal incidentaloma. She had not
any complaints, her history was not notable for any disease. CT showed right adrenal
heterogeneous mass 9!8!7.6 cm with native density - 30-69HU, which eclipsed
liver and was inseparable from the inferior vena cava. Because of young age,
absence of any clinics, parameters of native density, adrenocortical cancer was
strongly suspected. According to protocols hormonal examination was performed:
plasma cortisol after
1-mg DST  was 45 nmol/l (50 nmol/l), 24-hour urinary
fractionated metanephrines were 248 mcg (320 mcg), 24-hour urinary fractionated
normetanephrines were 2453.0 mcg (390 mcg). Because of discordance between
tumor size and relatively low normetanephrines concentration, additional laboratory
testing was performed. Hook-effect was excluded, the level of metabolites was the
same. Since there was a possibility of concurrent Ph and cortical carcinoma, in order
to  set  definitive  diagnosis  MIBG-scintigraphy  was  performed.  Scintigraphy
revealed signs of hormonal activity of right adrenal tumor. The diagnosis of Ph
was made. Patient was preoperativelly given alpha-blocker for 14 days. Right
laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed without any complications. Histologic
picture proved that there was Ph. Postoperativelly catecholamine metabolites were
normal. Genetic testing did not show VHL and SDHD mutations.
Conclusions
The size of Ph does not always correlates with its hormonal activity. At the same
time, strict adherence to protocols is necessary in all cases despite the fact that
sometimes we can see ‘obvious’ signs of the other disease such as adrenocortical
cancer in our case.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP92
EP93
Hypertension and hypokalemia in a 56-year-old male
Sara Quintana-Arroyo, Carmen Acosta-Calero, Claudia Arnas-Leon,
Ana-Delia Santana-Suarez & Francisco-Javier Martinez-Martin
Hospital Doctor Negrin, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
A 56-year-old Swedish male was diagnosed with hypertension, initially attributed
to continued use of NSAIDs. These were withdrawn and treatment with 80 mg
valsartan  was  started,  but  BP  remained  uncontrolled.  A  fixed  combination
(valsartan/hydrochlorothiazide, 80/12.5 mg) was introduced, but blood pressure
remained high and hypokalemia (KC3.3 mEq/l) developed. The patient was
referred to our Endocrinology Clinic for study. Treatment was switched to
manidipine 10 mg/12 h.
Physical Examination: Weight 78 kg, height 176 cm, waist 98 cm, BMI 25 kg/m2,
BP 155/88 mmHg, HR 76 lpm, no additional findings.
Lab  tests:  CBC,  glucose,  Cr,  lipid  profile,  liver  enzymes,  NaC:  Normal.
KC3.6 mEq/l, aldosterone 12 ng/ml, plasma renin activity (PRA) !0.2 ng/ml/h.
ECG, chest radiograph, abdominal CT: normal.
Hyperaldosteronism was ruled out due to low aldosterone, and a diagnosis of
pseudohypoaldosteronism was considered. Liddle syndrome, congenital enzyme
deficiencies and desoxicorticosterone-secreting tumors were deemed unlikely due
to the age of debut, absence of family history and normal CT scan.
When directly asked the patient revealed daily intake of 50-75 g of salmiak
(licorice with salt and ammonium chloride). One month after stopping licorice
intake and withdrawing manidipine, blood  pressure was controlled
(136/78
mmHg); KC(4.8 mEq/l), aldosterone (128 ng/ml) and PRA (0.9 ng/ml/h) were
normal. Currently the patient consumes 18-b-glycyrrhetinic acid-free salmiak and
his BP and lab tests remain normal.
In conclusion, the patient presented with hypertension, hypokalemia, suppressed
PRA and low aldosterone, leading to the diagnosis of pseudohyperaldosteronism.
The finding of the habitual high intake of licorice was the key to diagnosis and
treatment, since its withdrawal led to the normalization of BP and lab tests.
The usual intake of O2 mg/kg/day of 18-b-glycyrrhetinic acid is a cause of
pseudohyperaldosteronism, which can be a diagnostic challenge.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP93
EP94
Asymptomatic ‘giant’ pheochromocytoma discovered as adrenal
incidentaloma
Danijela Radojkovic1, Milan Radojkovic2, Milica Pesic1, Sonja Kostic1,
Sanja Curkovic1, Sasa Radenkovic1, Slobodan Antic1 & Ivan Ilic3
1Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Disorders, Clinical
Center, Nis, Serbia;2Surgery Clinic, Clinical Center, Nis, Serbia;
3Pathology Institute, Clinical Center, Nis, Serbia.
Introduction
Adrenal incidentalomas are defined as adrenal lesions incidentally discovered
during radiological imaging of the abdomen without prior suspicion of adrenal
disease.  Approximately
70%  of  adrenal  incidentalomas  are  non-functional
adenomas. Pheochromocytoma presents only 5-7% of the remaining functional
incidentalomas.  Asymptomatic  pheochromocytoma-incidentaloma  is  usually
smaller than 1 cm. Large pheochromocytoma, incidentally found, without any
clinical signs such as sever hypertension, headache, sweating and tachycardia are
very rare.
Patient case report
Herein, we present young woman (32 years old) admitted to Endocrinology
Clinic, after incidentally discovered right adrenal mass, size 60!70 mm, on
abdominal  sonogram,  performed  during  regular  systematic  examination.
Computed tomography confirmed ‘giant’ tumour, size 70!74 mm, with cystic
and necrotic areas and inhomogeneous contrast captivity.
Endocrine evaluation of the patient verified normal cortisol, ACTH, vanillyl-
mandelic acid in 24 h diuresis, plasma catecholamine and chromogranin serum
level. Electrolytes (sodium, potassium, calcium phosphorus, magnesium) were in
normal range.
The patient underwent [131I]-meta-iodobenzylguanidine ([131I]-MIBG) scan
which revealed large area of increased uptake above the right kidney indicating
giant right adrenal pheochromocytoma. After adequately preoperative prep-
aration, right adrenalectomy was performed. The procedure and postoperative
course were uneventful. The histopathological examination confirmed pheochro-
mocytoma.
Conclusion
Due to technological advances the frequency of adrenal incidentaloma diagnosis
is constantly increasing. Every incidentally found adrenal mass has to be carefully
examined regardless of its clinical presentation in order to prevent fatal oversight
of possible secreting nature and/or malignant potential of the lesion and to ensure
an adequate curable treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP94
EP95
Abstract unavailable.
EP96
Usefulness of assessment of urinal metoxycatecholamines secretion in
everyday clinical practice - pheochromocytoma as diagnostic challenge
Elwira Przybylik-Mazurek, Ewelina Rzepka, Monika Buziak-Bereza &
Alicja Hubalewska-Dydejczyk
Endocrinological Department, Medical College Jagiellonian University,
Krakow, Poland.
Introduction
Adrenal incidentaloma is an adrenal mass found on imaging studies done for other
reason than suspected adrenal disease. The majority of them are non-functioning
adenomas, however pheochromocytomas could be also observed. Currently, in
diagnosis of incidentalomas, the assessment of hormones of adrenal cortex and
medulla is performed. The aim of the study was to assess the incidence of
pheochromocytoma in patients with incidentaloma.
Methods
Medical records of 380 patients with incidentaloma hospitalized during
14
months in our clinic were retrospectively reviewed. Diagnostic imaging pictures,
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
the incidence of hypertension, urine metoxycatecholamines secretion (normeta-
nefrine or metanefrine), as well as hormonal assessment of adrenal cortex were
analyzed.
Results
Seventy eight percent of patients were hypertensive. Most of lesions have benign
features on imaging study. There were only nine histopatologically confirmed
pheochromocytomas, which comprises 2.37% of all cases. In those nine patients,
only one person have adenoma-like characteristic on imaging study. Accurate
levels of metoxycatecholamines were known in 304 patients of total 380. Forty-
three patients (14.1%) have elevated level of metoxycatecholamines. In this group
of 43 patients 7 (16.3%) patients have histopatologically confirmed pheochro-
mocytoma. Thirty five patients do not have pheochromocytoma in spite of
elevated metoxycatecholamines. Moreover, two patients with pheochromocy-
toma have unelevated metoxycatecholamines secretion with benign features on
imaging study in one of those patients.
Conclusion
1 The assessment of urine metoxycatecholamines secretion seems to have limited
usefulness in diagnosis of pheochromocytoma, mainly because of low incidence
of elevated level of metoxycatecholamines and possibility of false positive
results.
2 Moreover, normal level of urine metoxycatecholamines secretion were also
oberved in some patients with pheochromocytoma.
3
In  diagnosis  of  pheochromocytoma,  clinical  symptoms  and  radiological
imaging picture should play the most important role.
4 Assessment of urine metoxycatecholamines secretion should be performed in
justified cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP96
EP97
Abstract withdrawn.
EP98
From EFOS to ExFOS, active treatment phase - similarities and
differences of the Greek cohorts’ results
Kyriakos Aloumanis1, Panagiotis Kokkoris2, Andreas Kleisiounis3,
Evanthia Kofini1, Konstantinos Karachalios1, Vangelis Drossinos1 &
Georgios Kapetanos4
1Department of Medical Research, Pharmaserve-Lilly SACI, Kifissia
Athens, Greece;2Private office, Athens, Greece;3Private office, Chalkida,
Greece;43rd Orthopedics University Clinic, Papageorgiou General
Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Introduction
Extended  Forsteow  Observational  Study
(ExFOS),  a  multinational,  non-
interventional, prospective, observational study, designed to evaluate fractures,
back pain (BP), adherence and health-related quality of life (QoL) in teriparatide
(TPTD) treated patients, based on the extension of treatment duration (24 months)
and  the  addition  of  new  indications
(glucocorticoid-induced  and  male
osteoporosis) was compared with EFOS.
Methods/design
Baseline  data  showed  that  Hellenic  EFOS  patients  share  similarities  and
noticeable differences with female ExFOS patients1. To further evaluate such
similarities/differences between the two studies, we aimed to compare the active
treatment results of the Greek cohorts between EFOS2 (nZ301, all female) and
ExFOS (nZ416, 92.1% female). No statistical comparisons between studies were
performed.
Results
Approximately 80% of patients in both cohorts were on treatment one month
before maximum treatment period. Lumbar T-score (meanCSD) increased from
K3.46G0.67 (nZ175) at baseline to K2.54G0.74 (nZ120) at study end in
EFOS and from -3.39G0.73 (nZ263) to K2.36G0.63 (nZ78) in ExFOS. QoL
and BP parameters had similar improvements, as shown by examples depicted
below:
Conclusions
Two similarly designed studies, in comparable Hellenic populations, yielded
similar results that should be interpreted in the context of observational studies.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Baseline
3m
6m
12 m
18 m
24 m
BP (in previous month)
ExFOS
86.2%
79.3%
72.2%
65.6%
59.2%
42.2%
EFOS
93.2%
84.6%
77.8%
66.4%
64.2%
BP frequency (every/almost every day)
ExFOS
43.8%
12.4%
6.6%
4.3%
4.7%
0%
EFOS
39.9%
7.5%
3.9%
2.5%
2.2%
BP severity (moderate/severe)
ExFOS
76.2%
50.4%
32.8%
20.9%
22.2%
18.6%
EFOS
89.9%
69.4%
50.7%
42.4%
32.4%
EQ-5D Mobility (some/extreme problems)
ExFOS
57.9%
38.9%
29.9%
22.5%
17.7%
16.2%
EFOS
62.3%
36.7%
24.0%
18.3%
14.8%
EQ-5D VAS
ExFOS
57
66
71
75
77
83
EFOS
54
64
69
74
80
References
1BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2015;16:136.
2J Osteoporos. 2011;2011:510398.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP98
EP99
Vertebral and non-vertebral low-traumatic fractures in patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus
Tatiana Yalochkina1,2, Zhanna Belaya2, Liudmila Rozhinskaya2,
Michail Antciferov3, Larisa Dzeranova2, Marina Shestakova2 &
Galina Melnichenko2
1State Outpatient Clinic 219, Moscow, Russia;2The National Research
Centre for Endocrinology, Moscow, Russia;3Endocrine Dispensary,
Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Recent evidence suggests that the skeleton might be another affected organ in
patients  with  type
2
diabetes  mellitus
(T2DM).  This  study  evaluates  the
prevalence of low-traumatic vertebral and non-vertebral fractures and their risk
factors in subjects with T2DM.
Materials and methods
We invited outpatients with T2DM, who were under observation in a single
outpatient clinic. The subjects were interviewed regarding the presence of low-
traumatic fractures and underwent lateral X-ray imaging from T4 to L5. Age, sex,
postmenopause and disease duration, complications, HbA1c, calcium intake, risk
factors for fracture (FRAX) were registered. Handgrip strength was measured by
dynamometer.
Results
Two hundred (141, 70.5% females) consecutive T2DM patients were enrolled.
The median of age (Q25-Q75) 66 (60-74 years), BMI 31 (27-36) kg/m2, disease
duration 8 (4-14) years (neuropathy was diagnosed in 113 patients, retinopathy-
94, nephropathy-8), HbA1c 7.4% (6.7-8.5). Fractures were reported in 68 (34%)
patients, in 26 (13%) cases there were vertebral fractures and in 52 (26%) low-
traumatic non-vertebral fractures. In 10 cases multiple fractures both vertebral
and/or non-vertebral were registered. The most frequent fractures were of low-
extremities including 2 hip and 26 shin fractures; the upper-extremities were the
next most frequent location including 3 humerus, 19 wrist and 4 ulna fractures.
Subjects with any fractures were older PZ0.004, but did not differ in disease
duration PZ0.196, HbA1c PZ0.99, or calcium intake PZ0.62. It seems that
subjects with retinopathy fractured  more K42.9% as compared  to patients
without retinopathy K27.6% PZ0.001, no difference in any other complications
were found. Subjects with fracture had lower grip strength in both hands 30.0
(24.6-39.5) vs 26.5 (22.7-31.5) dAN PZ0.019 right hand; 27.7 (22.1-37.5) vs
25.0
(20.0-31.8) dAN left hand PZ0.013.
Conclusions
Patients with T2DM have high prevalence of low-traumatic fractures (34%),
mostly of low-extremities, which might be related to both ageing and general
frailty as well as diabetes complications such as retinopathy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP99
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP100
Osteoporosis and osteopenia in older Emirati men with type 2 diabetes
mellitus
Raya A Almazrouei1, Fatima M Alkaabi1, Heba El Gayar1, Nader Lessan2 &
Maha T Barakat2
1
Imperial College London Diabetes Centre, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates;
2Imperial College London Diabetes Centre, AbuDhabi, United Arab
Emirates.
Introduction
Osteoporosis is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in older men, but
the extent of the problem amongst Emiratis has not been previously reported. A
screening programme has been in place for older men in a large diabetes centre in
the  UAE,  allowing  patients  over  age
70  to  have  DEXA  scans;  we  have
investigated the prevalence of osteoporosis and osteopenia in this population.
Methods
Data on 179 consecutive patients with type 2 diabetes over age 70 with DEXA
scan reports were retrieved and analysed. T-score at lumbar spine, femoral neck
and hip were recorded. Relevant demographic and phenotypic data and laboratory
investigations at or closest the time of DEXA and comorbidities list were
extracted from individual computerized patient records. Stata13.0 was used for
data analysis.
Results
Table 1 summarizes results based on the diagnosis of osteoporosis or osteopenia
at any of the five sites studied. Osteoporosis at lumbar spine and left femoral neck
was noted in 32.2 and 19.5% of the patients respectively. Significant predictors of
bone density (univariate regression analysis) included age (odds ratio-OR 1.14,
PZ0.02), weight (OR 0.96, PZ0.02) and height (OR 0.87, P!0.001). In
multivariate analysis including age, weight, height and eGFR, only height (OR
0.88,  PZ0.005)  remained  a  predictor  with  significance.  There  was
82.4%
osteoporosis range T-scores concordance between the right and left femoral neck
levels.
Table 1.
Osteoporosis
Osteopenia
Normal
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
P value
Number and (%)
83
(46.4%)
73
(40.8%)
23
(12.9%)
-
Non-smoker
64
(77%)
53
(73%)
17
(74%)
0.96
Hypothyrodism
2
(2.4%)
5
(6.9%)
1
(4.4%)
0.41
Hypertension
76
(91.6%)
67
(91.8%)
22
(95.7%)
0.80
CVD
25
(30.1%)
16
(21.9%)
7
(30.4%)
0.47
Insulin therapy
19
(22.9%)
25
(34.3%)
10
(43.3%)
0.1
OHAs
74
(89.2%)
65
(89%)
21
(91.3%)
0.95
Weight (kg)
69.8
(G14.3)
76.4
(G13.2)
80.2
(G10.3)
!0.001
Height (cm)
162.4
(G7.2)
164.4
(G5.6)
169.04
(G6.4)
!0.001
eGFR ml/min per 1.73 m2
66.7
(G33.3)
74.4
(G24.9)
80.3
(G16.3)
0.07
HbA1c (%)
7.1
(G1.3)
7.4
(G1.5)
6.9
(G0.9)
0.22
Serum calcium (mmol/l)
2.3
(G0.1)
2.3
(G0.1)
2.3
(G0.1)
0.31
Strgm vitamin D (nmol/l)
76.9
(G27.4)
76.4
(G24.1)
82.6
(G32.9)
0.6
TSH level (milli IU/l)
2.7
(G1.4)
2.6
(G1.5)
2.7
(G1.2)
0.94
DM duration (years)
12.5
(G8.9)
16.2
(G10.2)
15.3
(G10.9)
0.05a
CVD, cerebrovascular disease; OHAs, oral hypoglycemic agents; testing
based on one-way ANOVA and c2 test.
aDM duration not normally distributed, median test P valueZ0.25.
Conclusion
Compared to European reports, prevalence of osteoporosis in this population of
Emirati men with type 2 diabetes is much higher. Specific local factors such as
relative inactivity in old age and lack of sun exposure may be responsible for such
high prevalence figures and need to be further investigated in a larger group of
patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP100
EP101
Abstract withdrawn.
EP102
A rare cause of hypocalcaemia: pseudohypoparathyroidism
Gulay Alp1, Nilufer Ozdemir Kutbay2, Banu Sarer Yurekli2,
Emin Karaca3, Mehmet Erdogan2, Sevki Cetinkalp2, Gokhan Ozgen2,
Ferda Ozkinay3 & Fusun Saygili2
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Internal Medicine Department, Izmir,
Turkey;2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Endocrinology and
Metabolism Department, Izmir, Turkey;3Ege University Faculty of
Medicine, Medical Genetics Department, Izmir, Turkey.
Introduction
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a rare disease characterized by end-organ
resistance  to  parathyroid  hormone,  causing  hypocalcemia  with  hyperpho-
sphatemia and elevated parathormone (PTH) levels. A prevalence of 3.4/million
has been reported. Here, we present a rare case with PHP.
Case report
A 28-year-old male patient with spasms in hands and feet was evaluated in the
outpatient department of neurology and was referred to endocrinology clinic due
to calcium level of 5.9 mg/dl.
Physical  examination  results:  He  had  facial  dysmorphism.  Trousseau  and
Chvostek signs were positive. Moderate mental retardation was observed.
Laboratory tests results: Serum total Ca: 5.7 mg/dl (8.2-10.6 mg/dl), P: 5.9 mg/dl
(3-5 mg/dl), PTH (intact): 873 U/l (12-88 pg/ml), uric acid: 2.3 (3.5-7.2) 24-h
urinary Ca: 9 mg and urinary P:441 mg. Serum vitamin D level: 29 nmol/l. Urine
cAMP and Gsa subunit assays were not available in the tests.
The  roentgenogram  of  the  hands  revealed  that he  had  short  bilateral  fifth
metacarps and soft tissue calcifications in his left hand and bilateral forearm
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(Figure 1). His electrocardiogram was normal. QTc interval was 42 ms. In Cranial
CT, symmetrical diffuse calcifications were observed in both hemispheres and in
the central part of the caudate nucleus and the level of nuclei lentiform of the basal
ganglia (Figure 2).
Conclusion
PHP is classified as types 1a, 1b, 1c and type 2. Patients with type 1a have
hypocalcamia, hyperphosphatemia and elevated serum PTH. These patients are
characterized by short stature, obesity, moderate mental retardations, round faces,
dental  hypoplasia  and  brachydactyly;  shortening  of  the  metacarpal  bones
particularly the third, the fourth and the fifth as well as the features of Albrights
hereditary osteodystrophy.
PHP type 1 is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. GNAS gene is located
on chromosome 20q13 and defects are heterogeneous and complex. Our patient
did not have GNAS mutations (but we only looked at exon 8).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP102
EP103
Association between household size, residential area, and osteoporosis:
analysis of 2008-2011 KNHANES
Sung-Woo Kim1, Kwi-Hyun Bae1, Jae-Han Jeon1, Yeon-Kyung Choi1,
Mi-Kyung Kim2, Hye-Soon Kim2, Hyun-Ae Seo3, Eui Hyun Kim3 &
Keun-Gyu Park1
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu,
Republic of Korea;2Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Internal Medicine, Keimyung University School of
Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea;3Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, Daegu Fatima Hospital,
Daegu, Republic of Korea.
Abstract withdrawn.
EP104
Association of vitamin D receptor gene with development of
osteoporosis in patients with hypothyroidism
Ivan Pankiv
Bukovinian State Medical University, Chernivtsi, Ukraine.
Polymorphism of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene has been reported to play a
major role in variations for genetic regulation of bone mass. The current study is
an attempt to examine the association of these variations with osteoporosis in
patients with hypothyroidism. The purpose of this study was to determine
distribution of genotypes and allelic frequencies of polymorphism of rs731236
(CC61968t; TaqI) VDR gene, and also risk of development and association with
risk factors of bone mineral density changes in women with hypothyroidism.
Methods
There were 95 women with hypothyroidism under a supervision in age from 34 to
65 years. Exposure of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism in vitro was
produced by the method of PCR.
Results
The  prevalence  of  mineral  bone  density  disorders  among  patients  with
hypothyroidism  was
46.3%,  including  with  osteopenia
32
(33.7%)  and
osteoporosis in 12 (12.6%). Presence of homozygote on major allele VDR gene
rs731236 (CC61968t; TaqI) possesses protective effect on development of
osteoporosis,  while  the  presence  of  homozygote  on  minor  allele  of  this
polymorphism of T/T assists to development of osteoporosis.
Conclusions
Presence of genotype major allele (C) is diminished with the 3.8 times greater risk
of osteoporosis development, while presence of minor allele (T) is promoted with
the 3.9 times greater risk. Presence in the genotype of homozygote on minor allele
T/T combines with more expressed decline of mineral bone density. Minor allele
(C) is associated with hypocalcemia, by the decline of bone mineral density,
hyperphosphatemia, activation of osteocalcin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP104
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP105
A rare differential diagnosis of Paget’s disease
Berrin Cetinarslan1, Alev Selek1, Zeynep Canturk1, Ilhan Tarkun1,
Ozlem Zeynep Akyay1 & Nagihan Akkas2
1Department of Endocrinology, Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine,
Kocaeli, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Kocaeli University
Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli, Turkey.
Hypertrophic  osteoarthropathy
(HOA)  is  a  syndrome  characterized  with
proliferation of bones at the distal parts of extremities. Clubbing, periostitis of
tubular bones and non-inflammatory arthritis of lower extremities are commonly
seen as a part of this syndrome.
66 years old male patient was admitted to our hospital with painful swelling of his
left lower extremity for 2 months. He denies any other systemic symptoms such as
fever and weight loss. He had history of aortailiac bypass surgery 5 years ago. On
physical examination there were pitting edema on his left leg and clubbing of the
toes, no hyperemia or temperature increase was found. His bone scan revealed
increased  osteoblastic  activity  on  left  anterior  iliac  spine  and  also  diffuse
expansive heterogen osteoblastic activity was seen on left humerus, tibia, fibula
and digital bones. This involvement was decided as Paget’s disease and he was
treated with parenteral zoledronic acid in another center. On his admission to our
hospital,  periostal  reaction  of  bilateral  femur  and  tibia  was  seen  on  plain
radiographs. HOA was decided as preliminary diagnosis. Positron emission
tomography (PET) was performed in order to identify the etiology of HOA and
revealed bilateral heterogen periostal reaction of lower extremities confirming
HOA. Also there was increased FDG activity on abdominal aorta and iliac
bifurcation  indicating  aortitis.  Contrast  enhanced  abdominal  CT  showed
periaortitis caused by a fistula between aortic graft wall and 3. part of the
duodenum. The fistula tract was not connected with vascular lumen. Daptomicine
350 mg/day and Ertapenem 1 g/day were started. Revision of the graft was
planned during cardiovascular surgery consultation. The patient will be operated
after 6 weeks of antibiotic treatment is completed.
Vascular graft infection, as reported here, is a rare cause of secondary HOA, but it
might be strong and important sign of infection of vascular prosthesis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP105
EP106
An uncommon reason of osteoporosis: spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita
Onur Elbasan1, Pinar Sisman2, Aybuke Muti1, Ozen Oz Gul2,
Soner Cander3, Erdinc Erturk2 & Canan Ersoy2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Uludag University Medical School,
Bursa, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Uludag University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey;3Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and
Research Hospital, Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) is a rare congenital disease of
skeletal system,which is characterized by short stature, shortage of trunk and
mostly affect vertebral column and epiphysis of long bones. In this case report, we
aimed to represent a patient complaining of short stature and referred to our
hospital,who was detected to have an early onset osteoporosis accompanied by
proximal femoral aplasia; in the light of literature.
Case
A 21 years old female, referred to our hospital since she was complaining of short
stature. According to this first assessment, her height was 125.7 cm, weight
35.7 kg and had a pelvic deformity. By performing a skeletal scanning in that
period;a platispondilia like appearance in the vertebral column, an increase in
lumber lordosis,disappearance of both femoral heads,shortening of femoral neck,
lateral  subluxation  of  proximal  femur  were  detected  and  bilateral  femoral
osteotomy  and  a  fixation  were  performed  respectively.  In  the  physical
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
examination we noticed coxa vara, scoliosis and has a flattened face. The
biomedical parameters are all summarized. In the skeletal examination we noticed
deformation and stabilization materials in the femur heads and counter rotation
developed  in  cervical  axis  which  was  not  exist  previously,  mild  loss  of
intervertebral disc height in C3, C4, C5, C6. We calculated lumbal total Z score as
K3.2. It was thought that the reason of premenopausal osteoporosis was SEDC.
We prescript teriparatide because of her age and high grade of osteoporosis.
Discussion
Although osteoporosis was reported in Spondiloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda cases,
we did not notice any report mentioning about the relationship between SEDC
and osteoporosis; in the literature. As a conclusion, skeletal dysplasia which is
mostly presented with short stature, should be in mind as one of the prediagnosis
in any case of early onset osteoporosis with short stature.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP106
EP107
Bone microarchitecture assessed by trabecular bone score in liver
transplants with New-Onset Diabetes after transplantation
Maria Soledad Librizzi, Gonzalo Allo, Milagros Sierra,
Mercedes Aramendi, Sonsoles Guadalix, Carlos Jimenez, Guillermo
Martinez Diaz-Guerra & Federico Hawkins
12 Octubre Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
Background
The increased risk for fractures in type 2 diabetes mellitus despite higher bone
density is unexplained. Trabecular bone score (TBS) is a novel texture index
related to bone microarchitecture and it is independent of bone mineral density
(BMD). The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between TBS,
BMD  and  body  composition  in  patients  with  New-Onset  Diabetes  after
transplantation (NODAT).
Methods
In a cross-sectional study, TBS was examined in 28 patients with NODAT (mean
age 58.5G9.6), and 43 non diabetic LT patients (mean age 55.4G11.5), classified
according ADA criteria. Lumbar, femoral BMD and body composition were
measured  with  DXA  densitometer
(QDR  4500,  Hologic,  USA).  Body
composition parameters included total body mineral content (BMC), total fat
mass (FM), total fat free mass (FFM) and percentage of fat mass (%FM). Bone
biomarkers included: Osteocalcin (OC, electrochemiluminiscence assay, NMID
Osteocalcin, Roche Diagnostics) and b-CrossLaps.
Results
TBS showed positive correlations with lumbar BMD (rZ0.2637, P!0.05),
femoral neck BMD (rZ0.26, PZ0.03) and total BMC (rZ0.26, P!0.05). An
inverse correlation was found between TBS and FM (rZK0.34, P!0.05) and
%FM (rZK0.27, P!0.05). No correlations were found between TBS and OC
and b-CrossLaps. No differences were found between non-diabetic and NODAT
patients in terms of TBS and lumbar or femoral BMD.
Conclusion
In LT patients, TBS is related to fat mass parameters and lumbar and femoral neck
BMD. We have not found deterioration of bone microarchitecture in patients with
NODAT, assessed by TBS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP107
EP108
Serum leptin, adiponectin and ghrelin concentrations in post-
menopausal women: is there an association with bone mineral density?
Vasilios Mpalaris1, Panagiotis Anagnostis2, Athanasios Anastasilakis3,
Dimitrios Goulis2, Argyrios Doumas1 & Ioannis Iakovou1
1Department of Nuclear Medicine, Papageorgiou Hospital, Aristotle
University, Thessaloniki, Greece;2Unit of Reproductive Endocrinology, 1st
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical School, Thessaloniki,
Greece;3Department of Endocrinology, 424 General Military Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Greece.
Introduction
Adipokines and ghrelin exert well-documented effects on energy expenditure and
glucose metabolism. Experimental data also support a role in bone metabolism,
although data from clinical studies are conflicting. The purpose of this cross-
sectional study was to investigate the association of serum concentrations of
leptin, adiponectin  and ghrelin  with bone  mineral density
(BMD)  in post-
menopausal women.
Methods/design
BMD in lumbar spine and femoral neck, and circulating leptin, adiponectin and
ghrelin concentrations were measured in 110 healthy post-menopausal women.
Patients with secondary causes of osteoporosis were excluded.
Results
Osteoporosis was diagnosed in 30 (27%) women and osteopenia in 54 (49%).
Serum leptin concentrations were positively correlated with both lumbar spine
(rZ0.343, P!0.01) and femoral neck BMD (rZ0.370, P!0.01). Adiponectin
concentrations were negatively associated with BMD at both sites (rZK0.321,
P!0.01  and  rZK0.448,  P!0.01  respectively).  No  significant  correlation
between ghrelin concentrations and BMD was found. Osteoporotic women had
lower  body weight, BMI and leptin concentrations,  but higher  adiponectin
concentrations compared with non-osteoporotic women. In multivariate stepwise
regression analysis, the association of adiponectin concentrations with BMD
remained significant only for femoral neck, after adjustment for body weight
or BMI.
Conclusions
An inverse association between adiponectin and femoral neck BMD was found in
post-menopausal women, independently of body weight. The positive association
between leptin and BMD was dependent on body weight, whereas no effect of
ghrelin on BMD was evident.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP108
EP109
Bone turnover markers in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis
depending on the level of vitamin D
Jovanka Novakovic-Paro1,2, Tijana Icin1,2, Milena Mitrovic1,2,
Dragana Tomic-Naglic1,2, Radoslav Pejin1,2, Djordje Popovic1,2,
Ivana Bajkin1,2, Bojan Vukovic3,2, Damir Benc1,2,
Milica Medic-Stojanoska1 & Branka Kovacev-Zavisic1,2
1Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Clinical Centre
of Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia;2Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi
Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia;3Emergency Center, Clinical Centre of Vojvodina,
Novi Sad, Serbia.
Introduction
It is indisputable importance of vitamin D for the preserved integrity of the
skeleton and bone metabolism.
The aim of the study was to analyse bone turnover parameters in relation to the
vitamin D status in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis.
Materials and methods
This study included a total of 195 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.
Osteoporosis is diagnosed by DXA scan of the spine and hip. Bone turnover
markers osteocalcin, beta-crosslaps and 25OHD were determined by ECLIA
method on Elecsys apparatus. Vitamin D status is defined as a deficiency
if
25OHD  !30 nmol/l.  Within  the  range  of  normal  values  of
25OHD
(30-100 nmol/l), insufficiency is defined if level of 25OHD is 30-75 nmol/l
and a sufficient level of 25OHD O75 nmol/l.
Results
The mean age was 60.30G6.33 years and mean duration of postmenopausal
period was 11.8G5.51 years. The average BMI was 25.41G4.26 kg/m2. The
average  value  of
25OHD  was  39.98G17.97 nmol/l,  the  average  value  of
osteocalcin was 32.31G11.97 ng/ml and the average value of beta-crosslaps was
545.31G212.07 pg/ml. 25OHD level of !30 nmol/l in 59 (30.26%) subjects, the
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
level  of
25OHD  30-75 nmol/l  had  a  128  (65,64%),  and  vitamin D  levels
O75 nmol/l, had an 8 (4,10%) of subjects. There was a statistically significant
difference in levels of osteocalcin and beta-crosslaps compared to the levels of
vitamin D defined as a deficiency, insufficiency and sufficiency. Average values
of osteocalcin in the above defined groups of vitamin D were 35.15G14.26 vs
31.49G10.77 vs 24.59G5.38 ng/ml; P!0.1. Average values of beta-crosslaps in
the above defined groups of vitamin D were 584.16G230.77 vs 539.30G201.33
vs 354.88G128.33 pg/ml; P!0.01.
Conclusions
In women with postmenopausal osteoporosis dominates deficit and insufficient
levels of vitamin D. Insufficient vitamin D leads to accelerated bone remodelling
with a predominance of bone resorption over formation which contributes to the
reduction of bone mass and quality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP109
EP110
Clinical characteristics of Paget disease of bone from Turkey
Dilek Gogas Yavuz1, Semra Ayturk2, Firat Bayraktar3, Sevki Cetinkalp4 &
PD Study Group1
1
Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Trakya
University Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey;3Dokuzeylul University
Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey;4Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir,
Turkey;5Study Group, Gaziantep Samsun Adana Manisa Konya Ankara,
Turkey.
Prevalence of Paget’s disease (PD) of bone as well as clinical and demographical
presentation may differ between the populations.
Aim
In this study we evaluate clinical and demographical parameters of Paget’s
disease patients followed from endocrinology clinics in Turkey.
Method
An invitation was sent to all tertiary endocrinology clinics to complete a survey
on demographic clinical, laboratory parameters, treatment modalities of patients
with PD. Clinically or histologically proven 185 PD cases reported from 16
centers.
Results
A cohort of PD has female preponderance (FM/M:105/80) with a mean age of
57G10 years at onset. Its clinical features are bone pain, back pain and headache,
Fracture  and  typical  skeletal  involvement  reported  in  five  and
18  patients
respectively. Only two patients have family history for PD. 67.5% (n:125)
patients have polyostotic disease. Skull (41.6%), pelvis (53.5%), spine (41%) and
femur (25.4%) are being the commonly affected bone sites. Seventeen patients
with skull involvement reported to have hearing loss. The biochemical profile
at diagnosis had a mean alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 5520G652 IU/l (range
280-5762 IU/l),  serum  calcium:
9.2G1 mg/dl,  iPTH:73.9G65 pg/ml,
25OHvitD:32.6G27 ng/ml. Five patients wasn’t need treatment. Intravenous
bisphosphonates was the most commonly used drugs (42% and 23% of patines
treated with zoledronic acid
5 mg and pamidronate 60-90 mg respectively)
remaining  given  high  dose  oral  bisphosphonate
(alendronate
40 mg/day
or risedronate). Most cases respond well with decreased Serum ALP level
(117G114 IU/l) at the 6th month of the therapy. Duration of follow up was
7.5G6.5 years.
Conclusion
In this group of PD from Turkey female predominance and polyostotic disease, no
significant family history. Classical clinical and biochemical features respond
well to intravenous or high dose bisphosphonate therapy and need a lifetime
follow-up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP110
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP111
Association of bone mineral density with DXA-determined adipose
tissue volume and concentrations of selected hormones in
young adult women
Elzbieta Sowinska-Przepiera, Elzbieta Andrysiak-Mamos, Justyna Syrenicz
& Anhelli Syrenicz
Department of Endocrinology, Metabolic Diseases and Internal Diseases,
Pomeranian Medical University, 71-252 Szczecin, Poland.
Introduction
The question if obesity may protect against osteoporosis is still a matter of
discussion. A breakthrough in this debate may be the introduction of a state-
of-the-art  densitometric  software
(CoreScan)  suitable  for  fast  and  accurate
volumetry of total body fat (BF), including android (A), female-type (F) and
visceral fat (VAT) volumes.
Aim
The aim of the study was to analyze an association between bone mineral density
(BMD]), concentrations of selected hormones, BF, A, F and VAT volumes in
young adult women.
Material and methods
The study was a retrospective analysis of densitometric scans and laboratory
parameters of 108 women (age: 20-33 years). Two groups of patients were
identified based on their body mass index (BMI), with BMI !25 kg/m2  and
O25 kg/m2. The list of analyzed variables included body height and weight, BMI,
BMD, DXA-determined BF, A, F and VAT volumes, concentrations of TSH,
FT3, FT4, FSH, LH, estradiol, PRL, DHEA-SO4, androstendion, testosterone,
SHBG, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, levels of glucose and insulin measured after an
overnight fast and during glucose tolerance test.
Results
Irrespective of the analyzed area
(BF, A, F, VAT), adipose tissue volume
correlated significantly with BMD L1-L4, BMD total, blood concentrations of
free estrogens and testosterone (P!0.000). Moreover, a significant relationship
was found between VAT volume and concentrations of insulin after an overnight
fast, as well as at 60 and 120 min of glucose tolerance test (P!0.000). Finally,
VAT volume correlated inversely with blood concentration of SHBG (P!0.003).
The two groups of patients differed significantly in terms of their mean values of
densitometric parameters (P!0.000).
Conclusions
Greater volume of subcutaneous and visceral fat is likely associated with higher
BMD in young adult women and therefore may protect them against osteoporosis.
However, high volume of body fat may also predispose to polycystic ovary
syndrome and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP111
EP112
Relationships between body composition components in women with
anorexia nervosa
Inga Aleknaite1, Brigita Baks2, Marija Tamulaitiene1,3, Vidmantas Alekna1
& Virginijus Sapoka1
1Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania;2Eating
Disorders Center at Vilnius Mental Health Center, Vilnius, Lithuania;
3National Osteoporosis Center, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Objective
The  aim  of  this  study  was  to  assess  the  relationships  between  the  body
composition elements in women with anorexia nervosa (AN).
Description of methods
In this study women with AN and healthy women aged 19-33 years were
investigated. Anthropometry for height, weight and body mass index (BMI) was
performed.  Body  composition  including  lean  mass,  fat  mass,  fractional
contribution of fat, bone mineral content (BMC), and bone mineral density
(BMD) was analysed by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (iDXA, GE Lunar).
Pearson’s correlation coefficient was determined to assess associations. Statistical
significance was accepted when P!0.05.
Results
In total, 52 females were assessed: 17 AN patients and 35 healthy women, with no
differences in average age and height (25.12G4.69 vs 23.49G2.48 years and
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
1.66G0.05 m vs 1.67G0.05 m, respectively). Compared to controls, women with
AN presented lower body mass and lower BMI: 46.9G4.28 vs 59.9G7.07 kg, and
17.10G1.58
vs
21.37G2.02 kg/m2.  Total  lean  mass,  fat  mass,  fractional
contribution of fat, BMC, and BMD were significantly lower in AN subjects.
There was no significant difference in android/gynoid ratio between groups. In
women with AN, the correlations between percentages of gynoid fat and legs fat
(rZ0.942, P!0.001) as well as between legs lean mass and legs BMC (rZ0.724,
PZ0.001) were found. Lumbar spine BMD correlated with total legs mass
(rZ0.55, PZ0.04). In controls, more associations were found: gynoid fat (%)
correlated  with  lumbar  spine
(rZ0.374,  PZ0.027),  total  hip
(rZ0.341,
PZ0.045), femoral neck (rZ0.391, PZ0.02) BMD, and with legs lean mass
(rZ0.442, PZ0.008). Also, the legs lean mass was associated with lumbar
spine (rZ0.373, PZ0.027), total hip (rZ0.406, PZ0.015), and femoral neck
(rZ0.507, PZ0.002) BMD.
Conclusion
In patients with anorexia nervosa, gynoid fat (%) correlated with legs regional fat
(%) but no associations between gynoid or legs regional fat and BMD were found.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP112
EP113
Is carbonhydrate intake a risk factor for postmenopausal spinal
osteoporosis?
Duygu Kurtulus1, Ayse Humeyra Bicer4, Hatice Selcen Bicer2 &
Muzaffer Ilhan3
1Umraniye Training and Research Hospital Physical Therapy and
Rehabilitation Clinic, Istanbul, Turkey;2Umraniye Training and Research
Hospital Internal Medicine Clinic, Istanbul, Turkey;3Umraniye Training
and Research Hospital Endocrinology Clinic, Istanbul, Turkey;4Marmara
University Health Science Faculty Nutrition and Dietetics, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Osteoporosis is a disease that is characterized by bone mass loss and deterioration
in bone micro-architecture. One of the most important risk factors is dietary
habits. The effects of the amount of calcium intake via eating, and low calcium
consumption on the development of osteoporosis is still an active research area.
The intestinal absorption of calcium and its renal excretion are still not understood
very well. Even though the effects of carbohydrates on calcium absorption is not
known clearly, there are studies that there is a positive relationship between
carbohydrates and fractional calcium absorption.
Aims and methods
In our study, we have evaluated the amounts of dietary calcium intake and
carbohydrates among postmenopausal women with lomber osteoporosis. There
were 30 patients with postmenopausal spinal osteoporosis. Patients that were
older than 75, had inflammatory disease, cancer diagnosis, oral feeding problems,
intestinal absorption problems, renal disease, and the ones that used proton pump
inhibitor, as well as the ones that had only hip osteoporosis or mixed type
osteoporosis were not included. The demographic data and the resume of patients
were  recorded.  Their  daily  carbohydrate  and  calcium  consumption  were
evaluated using FFQ and calculated as daily consumption. L1-L4 t-scores were
recorded based on DEXA measurements.
Results
The mean age of patients was 61.1 (49-69), mean BMI was 29.1 (19.5-39.5), L1-
L4 t score had an average of K2.9, average daily carbohydrate consumption was
calculated  as
306.8 mg/day,  and  average  daily  calcium  consumption  was
calculated as 1016 mg/day. The recommended values for women over 50 are
130 g/day for carbohydrates, and 1200 mg/day for calcium. In our study group,
even though the calcium intake has been found to be below the reference value,
there are similar studies in literature originating from Turkey. The carbohydrate
consumption has been found to be three times the normal value.
Conclusion
There is no prior study that shows a positive or negative effect of carbohydrates
on  osteoporosis.  In  our  study,  we  have  shown  the  increased  carbohydrate
consumption in postmenopausal lomber osteoporosis. There is definitely a need
for larger scale studies on this topic.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP113
EP114
Bone density in the HIP and the lumbar spine in healthy male
population
Panagiotis Kokkoris, Ioannis Hatzidakis, Eleftherios Hatzelis,
Polyzois Makras & Georgios Toloumis
Hellenic Air Force General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Low bone density is a frequent finding in both women and men of older age.
There is not enough data about bone density in younger adults and especially men.
In this study we measured bone density in healthy males per decade of age.
Method
We measured bone density (BMD), T-score, Z-score and body mass index (BMI)
in 1902 healthy men, age 20-59 years old. The study population was divided into
four groups according to their age: Group A 20-29 years old, Group B 30-39,
Group C 40-49, Group D 50-59, and we compared the bone density between the
groups. Mean age of the total study population was 39.4 years, mean weight 83.6
kg and mean BMI 26.5G3 kg/m2. The mean BMD was 1.21G0.16 g/cm2 and
1.05G0.22 g/cm2 for the lumbar spine and the hip respectively.
Results
The BMDs per decade for the lumbar spine were as following: Group A 1.25G
0.14 g/cm2, Group A 1.25G0.14 g/cm2, Group B 1.21G0.15 g/cm2, Group C
1.20G0.16 g/cm2 and Group D 1.17G0.18 g/cm2. The BMDs for the hip were as
following: Group A 1.15G0.28 g/cm2, Group B 1.08G0.33 g/cm2, Group C 1.01G
0.12 g/cm2 and Group D 0.98G0.12 g/cm2. Statistical analysis showed that for each
age group, there was statistically significant difference (P!0.05) comparing with the
other age groups for the hip. However, in the spine this difference was observed only
when comparing Group A with all other Groups. There was not any statistically
significant difference between Groups B, C and D comparing with each other.
Conclusion
In healthy male population there is a progressive decrease in bone density according
to age. This decrease is more obvious in the hip. In the lumbar spine there is also
decrease but not statistically significant. One possible explanation is the appearance
of osteophytes after the age of 50 which may falsely increase bone density
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP114
EP115
The effect of anorexia nervosa on bone
Nuno Vicente, Dírcea Rodrigues, Luísa Barros, Daniela Guelho,
Luís Cardoso, Diana Oliveira, Diana Martins, Mara Ventura, Adriana Lages
& Francisco Carrilho
Servic¸o de Endocrinologia, Diabetes e Metabolismo, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
One of the most common endocrine complications of anorexia nervosa (AN) is
the decrease in bone mineral density. The authors evaluated the predictive factors
of osteopenia and osteoporosis in AN patients admitted with low weight.
Patients and methods
Retrospective analysis of 45 patients admitted with AN between 2001 and 2015 in
the Endocrinology department, corresponding to 63 admissions. Bone mineral
density was classified according to WHO criteria. The relationship between
clinical and analytical parameters and bone density was evaluated.
Results
Most patients were female (93.3%; nZ42), with mean age 20.6G7.7 years.
Restrictive subtype in 86.7% (nZ39), with the remainder of the purgative type.
On admission, mean BMI 14.3G1.6 kg/m2  and percentage of fat mass 4.2G
2.4%. Amenorrhea was present in 48.9% (nZ22), euthyroid sick syndrome in
15.6%  (nZ7),  hypogonadotrophic  hypogonadism  in
51.1%  (nZ23),  Bone
densitometry  documented  osteopenia  and  osteoporosis  in
57.1
and
31%,
respectively. Initial weight was statistically different between the densitometry
results (normal, osteopenia and osteoporosis; PZ0.04), without association with
initial fat mass (IFM), measurements of FSH, LH, estradiol, total testosterone,
TSH and fT4. Lumbar spine T-score was moderately correlated with initial weight
(rZ0.58), IFM (rZ0.39), initial fat-free mass (IFFM) (rZ0.55) and estradiol
levels (rZ0.37). Total femur T-score was moderately correlated with initial
weight (rZ0.48) and IFFM (rZ0.47).
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Discussion and conclusions
In this group of patients, low weight on admission was associated with osteopenia
and osteoposoris. Initial weight was positively correlated with better results of
densitometry in lumbar spine and total femur. The greater number of correlations
with lumbar spine bone loss is in agreement with the earlier changes in the
trabecular bone described in the literature. The low number of patients with
normal densitometry (nZ5) may have limited the association with other factors,
as well as the statistic strength of the presented results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP115
EP116
The influence of osteoporosis and cardiometabolic syndrome risk
factors on bone mineral density in females with thyroid dysfunction
Zoran Gluvic1,2, Vladimir Samardzic1, Milena Lackovic1, Jelena Tica
Jevtic1, Marina Vujovic1, Vesna Popovic-Radinovic1, Bojan Mitrovic2,
Marija Popin-Taric3, Anita Vasic-Vlaisavljevic3 & Esma R Isenovic4,5
1Zemun Clinical Hospital, Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes,
School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;2Zemun
Clinical Hospital, Medical Intensive Care Unit, School of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;3Zemun Clinical Hospital,
Department of Geriatrics, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Serbia;4Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Lab for radiobiology
and molecular genetics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;5The
Pharmaceutical Research Institute at Albany, Albany College of Pharmacy
and Health Sciences, New York, New York, USA.
Introduction
The effects of TSH and thyroid hormones on bone turnover are well-known. The
aim  of  this  study  is  to  examine  the  influence  of  osteoporosis
(Op)  and
cardiometabolic syndrome risk factors on bone mineral density (BMD) in the
population of age-matched, normotensive and nondiabetic females.
Material and methods
Cross-sectional study involved 76 females (average age 53G10 years), divided
into three groups: hypo-, hyper-, and euthyroid. Presence of smoking habit,
previous fracture/s and menopause were Op risk factors while body mass index
(BMI), waist circumference (WC), triglycerides, and cholesterol levels were
cardiometabolic risk factors. Index of cardiometabolic burden (ICMB) consisted
of BMI O30 kg/m2 and/or WC O88 cm and showed increase in cardiovascular
disease risk. Lumbar spine (LS) and left hip (LH) T-scores represented DEXA
measured of BMD. Osteopenia and Op were defined as T-scores ! K1.
Results
Decreased BMD was detected in 46 (60%) participants. The lowest T-scores were
observed in hypothyroid group. Average LS and LH T-scores were K1.1 and
K0.75  respectively,  and  differed  between  groups
(hypo/hyperthyroid  vs
euthyroid). Significant influences of BMI and triglycerides on LH T-score as
well as the presence of previous fractures and menopause on LS/LH T-scores
were detected. The effect of TSH, FT4 and ICMB on BMD was not significant.
Conclusion
In the population of females with thyroid dysfunction on initial presentation,
osteopenic  BMD  was  registered.  The  presence  of  previous  fractures  and
menopausis, BMI, and triglycerides significantly affected BMD, while TSH,
FT4, and ICMB did not affect BMD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP116
EP117
Use of Denosumab for treatment of steoporosis at a Tertiary Referral
Centre: an evaluation according to the UK National Institute of Health
and Care Excellence (NICE) Guidelines
Seifeldin Yahia, A M Roji, Roberto Ledda, Chioma Chilaka,
Kamal Chokkalingam, P J Prinsloo & H Divyateja
Nottingham University Hospital NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Aim
To evaluate the use of Denosumab in accordance to the UK National Institute of
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) technology appraisal guidelines TA204 -
Denosumab  indicated  for  the  prevention  of  osteoporotic  fractures  in  post-
menopausal women.
Methods
A retrospective audit involving 129 patients prescribed Denosumab for osteoporosis
between October 2011 and March 2015 at Nottingham University Hospitals, UK.
Denosumab prescription data was obtained from trust pharmacy and clinic databases,
whilst correlating patient information were obtained from electronic hospital records.
Results
A total of 129 patients received Denosumab during this period. One hundred and ten
patients were female with a mean age of 77 (range 23-95). Nineteen patients were
male with a mean age of 75 (range 47-91). Forty-six patients were treated for primary
prevention of osteoporotic fractures, whilst 83 patients were treated for secondary
prevention. In the female patients, 68% (nZ75) met the NICE TA204 criteria for use
of Denosumab, whilst in the remaining 32% (nZ35), oral bisphosphonate use was
inappropriate. All male patients had high fracture risk, and oral bisphosphonate use
was inappropriate in all cases. Overall, the most common indication for Denosumab
use was renal impairment (43%), intolerance to oral bisphosphonates (35%), and
other contra-indications (e.g. treatment failure, non-compliance) (22%).
Conclusion
All patients received oral bisphosphonate initially as first choice treatment for
prevention of osteoporotic fractures. Denosumab was only considered when oral
bisphosphonate became unsuitable. Male patients with high fracture risk received
Denosumab when no other suitable alternative could be used.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP117
EP118
Incident fragility fractures under antiresorbtive therapy in a 76 year old
lady: never too late to discover new causes
Amalia Ioana Arhire1, Cornelia Tudose3, Suzana Florea2 &
Carmen Gabriela Barbu1,4
1Department of Endocrinology, Elias Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;
2Department of Biology, Elias Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;3Department
of Pneumology, Elias Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;4“Carol Davila”
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
We report a case of severe osteoporosis with incident fragility fractures during
antiresorbtive therapy in the presence of amiodarone induced hypothyroidism.
Case report
A 76 year old female was admitted in our department for the evaluation of
antiresorbtive therapy in the context of a recent rib fracture after coughing. Severe
osteoporosis (lumbar T-score: K2.8DS, femoral neck T-score: K2.9DS with
multiple fragility fractures) was treated with i.v. Ibandronic acid and vitamin D
during the last 16 months.
Her  medical  history  consists  of  atrial  fibrillation,  hypertension,  severe
osteoporosis,  Raynaud’s  syndrome  and  Amiodarone  induced autoimmune
hypothyroidism currently under treatment with L-Thyroxine.
Clinical features: Normal BMI, kyphosis with loss of more than 5 cm of height in
the last 5 years, Raynaud’s syndrome with inflammatory signs of the hands, left
bronchial rales, a BP of 110/70 with a HR of 125.
Laboratory: ESRZ36 mm/h, normal serum calcium and 25OH vitamin D, a TSH
of 5.89 under 75 mg of L-Thyroxine.
The chest X-rays and CT showed a 4th rib fracture and a revealed T9 and T10
vertebral fractures, and also an important pulmonary fibrosis, which led to the
systemic sclerosis diagnosis.
Recent reviews found that the risk of osteoporotic fracture in systemic sclerosis is
similar to rheumatoid arthritis, affecting the axial skeleton and caused by the
chronic inflammatory state. Consequently, due to the newly increased fracture
risk
(due to the systemic sclerosis and incident fracture under antiresorbtive
treatment) we recommended teriparatide treatment.
Conclusion
The pathogeny of severe osteoporosis, in our case, revealed new findings after !2
years of treatment: besides advanced age and possible effects of L-thyroxine
replacement therapy we discovered that the established negative effects of the
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
systemic sclerosis on the skeleton revealed the need for a complete reevaluation
during follow-ups for osteoporotic patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP118
EP119
Thyroid and parathyroid secretion disorders in senile osteoporosis
Branka Arsenovic1, Miljanka Vuksanovic1 & Teodora Beljic-Zivkovic1,2
1Institute of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Disorders, Zvezdara
Clinic Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia;2University of Belgrade, School of
Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
Osteoporosis is a metabolic disease characterised by reduction of the bone mass
density and deterioration of architecture of the bone and its strength. Continuous
process of modeling and remodeling of bones is regulated by action of numerous
circulating hormones. Fracture risk makes osteoporosis clinically important disease.
Goal of this study was to examine thyroid dysbalance, parathormone secretion
disorder as risk factors for osteoporosis in elderly.
Description of methods
Study involved 195 participants aged 65 or more. Dual photon absorbtiometry (DXA),
to confirm osteoporosis. PTH disorder was found in 58%, and thyroid disorder in 30%
participants. Linear correlation was used as a statistical method to correlate variables.
Result
PTH levels (84.56 pg/mlG3.76) and decreased T-score levels showed high statistical
significance
(P!0.01), linear correlation coefficient
(r), K0.94. DXA Z-score
(K1.42 S.D.G0.05) and PTH level (84.56 pg/mlG3.76) also showed high significant
correlation (P!0.01, rZK0.82). Decreased TSH levels significant correlated with
decreased  bone  mineral  density.  Correlation  was  greater  in  elderly  with
hypothyreosis.
Conclusion
Thyroid disbalance and parathormone secretion disorder are common in elderly with
osteoporosis
Keywords: Osteoporosis, elderly, parathormone, thyroid hormone
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP119
EP120
Hypophosphatasia: a novel mutation
Gema López Gallardo & Carlos Roa Llamazares
Santa Bárbara Hospital, Puertollano, Ciudad Real, Spain.
Introduction
Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare genetic disease of very variable severity (from
letal to mild). HPP results from APL gene mutations, which lead to a deficiency of
tissue-nonspecifc alcaline phosphatase (TNAP), and accumulation of inorganic
pyrophosphate, a potent inhibitor of mineralization that is also a natural substrate
of TNAP in the extracelular space. HPP causes mineralization disorders including
soft bones (rickets, osteomalacia, fractures) and defects in teeth. The broad-
ranging expressivity that is largely explained by its autosomal recessive and
autosomal dominant patterns of inheritance involving at least
300 different
mutation (predominantly missense) in the TNSALP gen. Five principal subtypes
of HPP are described: perinatal lethal, infantile, childhood, adult, odontohypo-
phosphatasia and perinatal benign. We report a case of adult hypophosphatasia.
Case report
A 35 years old male patient with a history of loss of permanent teeth at a young
age and pain bone (thigh, hip) was referred to our endocrine clinic to study after a
recent family history sugestive of HPP.
Laboratory  investigations  revealed  low  serum  alcaline  phosphatase
(ALP)
(25 Ui/l; N 40-150), normal-low bone alcaline phophotase (6 mg/l N 6-30 mg/l),
and normal levels of plasma and urine phosphoethanolamine (PEA), pyridoxal
50-phosphate (PLP) and vitamine D.
Mutation analysis revelead a novel, heterozygous mutation within TNSALP gen
(c.567_568 insT; p. Asn190stop)
Conclusions
As this condition is not well known by healthcare professionals, the time to
diagnosis and initiation of adecuate treatment is postponed. HPP must be suspect
when clinical o laboratory clues include premature loss of primary dentition,
pseudofractures or recurrent poorly healing metatarsal stress fractures, a family
history sugestive of HPP or low serum ALP activity. Recently has been aproved
a fosfatase  alfa,  a  first-in-class  bone  targeted  human  recobinant  TNSALP
replacement therapy with paediatric onset HPP. Bisphosphonates or too high
doses of vitamine D are contraindicated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP120
EP121
Anorexia nervosa: beyond psychiatry
Nuno Vicente1, Dírceaj Rodrigues1, Luísa Barros1, Daniela Guelho1,
Luís Cardoso1, Diana Martins1, Diana Oliveira1, Adriana Lages1,
Mara Ventura1, Lígia Fonseca2, Júlia Figueiredo3 & Francisco Carrilho1
1Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department, Coimbra, Portugal;
2Psychiatry Department, Coimbra, Portugal;3Nutrition Unit, Coimbra,
Portugal.
Introduction
Despite being a psychiatric disorder, anorexia nervosa (AN) is associated to
severe systemic complications. The endocrine complications of AN are an
opportunity for the diagnosis and treatment of this condition. The authors report
the experience of the Endocrinology Department in the treatment of AN in
inpatient setting.
Patients and methods
Retrospective analysis of 45 patients admitted with AN between 2001 and 2015 in the
Endocrinology department, corresponding to 63 admissions. During admission,
patients had daily multidisciplanary monitoring, including endocrinology, psychol-
ogy, nutrition and nursing, with support from psychiatry whenever needed. Clinical
and analytical parameters, as well as other exams (electrocardiogram and bone
densitometry) were performed immediately after admission.
Results
Most  patients  were  female
(93.3%;  nZ42),  with  mean  age  20.6G7.7 years.
Restrictive subtype in 86.7% (nZ39), with the remainder of the purgative type. On
admission, mean BMI 14.3G1.6 kg/m2  and percentage of fat mass 4.2G2.4%.
Amenorrhea was present in 48.9% (nZ22), euthyroid sick syndrome in 15.6% (nZ7),
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism in 51.1% (nZ23), anemia in 33.3% (nZ15) and
leukopenia in 37.8% (nZ17). Sinus bradicardia was the most common electrocardio-
graphic finding (22.2%, nZ10). Bone densitometry documented osteopenia and
osteoporosis in 57.1 and 31%, respectively. Admissions had a mean lenght of stay of
44G20  days,  and  patients  had  a  mean  increase  in  BMI  of  1.7G2.3 kg/m2.
Readmission was needed in 35.6% of cases (nZ16), due to failure to increase weight.
Conclusion
The main indication for admission was the low weight. The most frequent endocrine
complications were low bone mass (88.1%), hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
(51.1%) and euthyroid sick syndrome (15.6%). Although prolonged, hospitalization
was useful, with improvement in clinical and analytical parameters. These patients
need a careful monitoring due to the substantial risk of relapse.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP121
EP122
Osteoporosis therapy with denosumab in patients after solid organ
transplantation
Jana Brunova1, Simona Kratochvilova1 & Josef Bruna2
1Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic;
2Medical Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
The transplantation- associated osteoporosis became an increasingly important
problem with the better survival of patients after the solid organ transplantation
(Tx). Adequate vitamin D intake, calcium supplementation and bisphosphonates
therapy  are  currently  recommended  for  osteoporosis  treatment.  However
bisphosphonates  may  be  limited  with  patients’  impaired  renal  function.
Denosumab use is the possible option but till now only a little data exist in
solid organ transplant population.
Patients and methods
We investigated 46 patients (M 19, F 27) mean age 56.2 y after solid organ
transplantation with mild renal impairment treated with Denosumab inj. 60 mg
every 6 months in years 2012-2015 with the mean duration of therapy 1.25 years.
The osteoporosis was diagnosed with densitometry (DEXA) using Lunar Prodigy
apparatus.  Simultaneous  pancreas  and  kidney  Tx  had
13
patients,  liver
transplantation
15 patients, solitary kidney Tx
16 patients and two patient
underwent heart Tx. We have also measured on the plain CXR the clavicle bone
index (BI) at the midpoint of the shaft. BI !0.5 represents osteoporosis.
Results
Osteoporosis of L spine was present in 34/46 patients (74%), hip osteoporosis in
23/46 patients (50%) and in distal radius in 23/46 patient (50%). The bone density
of L spine improved in 33/34 (97%) with mean increase in BMD 9.8%, BMD of
hips improved in 23/23 patients with osteoporosis, with mean increase 8.0%. Only
in two patients with hips osteopenia of BMD decreased. BMD of distal radius
improved in 28/44 (64%) patients and decreased in 16/44 (36%) patients after the
therapy. Clavicle bone index (measured in 30 patients) was 0.367 and did not
change significantly. The therapy with denosumab was well tolerated and we did
not register any complications.
Summary
Denosumab therapy improved bone density in osteoporotic patients after solid
organ transplantation and was well tolerated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP122
EP123
Osteoporosis as a side effect of antineoplazic therapy
Joan El Hajj Sleiman1, Dan Jinga1,4, Cornelia Nitipir1,3 &
Carmen Gabriela Barbu1,2
1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;
2Elias Hospital Discipline of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;3Elias
Hospital Oncology Department, Bucharest, Romania;4Universitary
Hospital Oncology Department, Bucharest, Romania.
Objective
The aim of this retrospective study is to evaluate the bone status in patients
receiving  oncological  treatment,  like  radiation,  chemotherapy,  adjunctive
therapies, and surgery.
Material and methods
Medical records of 102 womens (mean age 59.12 yrs) with breast cancer history
reffered for endocrine evaluation were retrospectivelly analysed. Demographic
data,  bone  densitometry  parameters,  prevalent  fractures  and  antineoplastic
treatments history were collected.
Results
All of the patients had history of breast surgery and chemotherapy; 10% had also
radiotherapy and 87% had a form of hormone suppresive treatment. According to
the lowest T score, 33% had densitometric criteria for osteoporosis and 55% had
osteopenia;
13.1% of the subjects had prevalent fractures at the evaluation
moment. 31% of the patients had the lowest Z score less than K1S.D. in the
absence of early menopause. According to our data, the prevalence of decrese in
BMD in serial mesurements was 40.5% in chemotherapy only patients, 62% in AI
only patients and 37.5% in patients with sequential combination between SERM
and AI. Only four patients out of 34 osteoporotic patients received treatment for
their osteoporosis.
Conclusion
Our data suggest an increased prevalence of decrease in BMD in patients related
to  their  history  of  antineoplazic  treatments;  from  all  the  combinations,
chemotherapy alone had almost the same effect as sequential combination of
SERM and AI and the most agresive for the bone was proved to be chemotherapy
and AI treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP123
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP124
Bone mineralization and hormonal status in Turner syndrome patients:
cross sectional one population study
Raimonda Klimaite1,2, Ruta Kriksciuniene1,2, Birute Zilaitiene2,3 &
Rasa Verkauskiene2,3
1Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kauno klinikos,
Kaunas, Lithuania;2Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas,
Lithuania;3Institute of Endocrinology, Lithuanian University of Health
Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Introduction
Women with Turner syndrome (TS) are known to be at risk of decreased BMD
(dBMD). Sex hormone replacement therapy is crucial to ensure the proper BMD
formation, although the dBMD remains a problem in TS.
Aim
To investigate  the  prevalence  of  decreased  bone  mineralization and  it’s
association with hormone levels in TS.
Subjects
Women with geneticaly confirmed TS aged R 18 year.
Methods
There were 53 women with TS enrolled into the prospective study. To assess the
BMD dual - energy - X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) parameters were analysed.
Z-score % K2.0 S.D. was defined as dBMD (International Society for Clinical
Densitometry guidelines). The lowest value of Z-score in the spine or in the neck
of femur was included into the analysis. The correlations between BMD and the
levels of Testosterone (T), Estradiol (E), Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH),
calcium (CaC), ionized calcium (Ca2C), body mass index (BMI), final height
(FH), the duration of E use (DE), were assessed.
Results
Mean age of participants was 29.06G7.19 year. Mean FH was 152.33G6.21 cm,
mean weight 57.19G11.40 kg, (mean BMI 24.59G4.82 kg/m2), mean BMD was
0.787G0.144 g/cm2. dBMD was diagnosed in 26.5% (nZ13) of TS, normal
BMD was found in 73.5% (nZ36). The significant correlation between BMD and
BMI was observed (rZ0.309, PZ0.039). The significant negative correlation
between DE and CaC (rZK0.317, PZ!0.05) was found. There was no
correlation between BMD and T, E, TSH levels.
Conclusions
BMI has positive effect on BMD in TS patients. No relationship between sex
hormone, TSH, calcium concentrations and BMD was identified in this study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP124
EP125
Osteoporosis in a cohort of 1062 postmenopausal women
Aicha Bouzid & Djamila Meskine
Laboratoire D’endocrinologie et Métabolisme Alger1, Algiers, Algeria.
Osteoporosis is a worldwide public health problem, particularly in ageing subjects
The objectives of this study were to screen a sample of postmenopausal women
aged O45 years for osteoporosis and to identify its risk factors.
Methods
This cross-sectional survey was conducted at the endocrinology department of the
Bologhine hospital in Algiers, Algeria. A total of 1062 postmenopausal women
participated in this study. Each subject completed a questionnaire designed to
identify  the  different  etiologies  and  to  document  putative  risk  factors  of
osteoporosis. Calcium intake was evaluated using self-report by Fardellone
frequency questionnaire. Bone mineral density was measured on 3 sites (lumbar
spine,  femoral  neck  and  total  hip).  Patients  were  classified  as  osteopenic,
osteoporotic or normal according to WHO diagnosis criteria.
Results
The prevalence of osteoporosis according to the NHANES and OFELY reference
curves were 35.9 and 29.4%, respectively.
Among the evaluated risk factors, age, puberty, parity, weight and personal
history of fracture were found to be major determinants of low BMD.
Mean age of women was 61.11G8.49 years. Mean BMI and weights were
29.53G5 kg/m2  and 73.07G13.34 kg, respectively. Mean age of puberty was
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
13.48G1.64  years  and  the  mean  number  of  pregnancies  was
5.20G3.68.
A history of fracture was noted in 281 patients.
Conclusion
Osteoporosis was frequent in our sample, and was mainly associated with certain
potential risk factors which were validated in epidemiological cohorts.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP125
EP126
Osteoporosis and type 2 diabetes
Djamila Meskine & Aicha Bouzid
Laboratoire D’endocrinologie et Métabolisme Alger1, Algiers, Algeria.
Diabetes mellitus and osteoporosis are important comorbidities commonly seen in
postmenopausal women. Diabetes can cause bone alterations that increases the
risk of fractures. However, in patients with type 2 diabetes, bone mineral density
(BMD) often appears not to be decreased, due to diabetes-induced increased
weight and body fat mass, which can hamper densitometric assessment of
osteoporosis and of fracture risks. The aim of the present study was to compare
bone mineral density (BMD) in two samples of postmenopausal women with and
without type 2 diabetes.
Methods
This was a cross-section study conducted at the Bologhine Hospital of Algiers
(Algeria). The study group consisted of 195 women with type 2 diabetes, recruited
from an original sample of 1062 patients (ageO45 years) who were screened for
osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Lumbar spine and femoral neck BMD
and other relevant clinical data were compared to those of a control group
(nZ867) comprising the women who did not have diabetes.
Results
Women with type 2 diabetes had significantly higher mean lumbar spine BMD
(0.9G0.1 vs 0.8G0.1, respectively, P!.0.019) than non-diabetic women. But no
difference in mean femoral neck BMD (0.7G0.1 vs 0.7G0.1, respectively,
P: 0.81) was observed. The proportion of osteoporotic women was 27.7% in the
group of women with type 2 diabetes, vs 29.8% in the control group.
Conclusion
Our findings support those of other studies that found higher BMD in patients
with type 2 diabetes compared to the general population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP126
EP127
State of bone mineral density in children with Turner Syndrome
in Ukraine.
Nataliya Zelinska1, Iryna Shevchenko2 & Evgenia Globa3
1N. Zelinska, Kiev, Ukraine;2I. Shevchenko, Kiev, Ukraine;3E. Globa,
Kiev, Ukraine.
Background
Low bone mineral density (BMD) and osteoporosis are the frequent consequences
of Turner Syndrome (TS).
Objective and hypotheses
We examined the BMD in TS girls with different age and karyotype.
Methods
Measurements of BMD (g/cm2), Z-score (S.D.) were conducted in 26 girls using X-ray
absorptiometry (DEXA) at the lumbar spine L2-L4 depending on the child’s age.
Results
According to the National registry of TS in Ukraine there are 453 girls with TS, aged
11 months-18.2 years. The prevalence is 77.5 per 100 000 live female new-borns or
0.06 per 1000 child population 0-18 year. Normal BMD (Z-score (K) 0.26G0.75
S.D.) had 23.13% patients, osteopenia (Z-score (K) 1.73G0.43 S.D.) K 46.21% and
osteoporosis (Z-score (K) 2.86G0.41 S.D.) K 30.66% of girls. The smallest age, at
which we recorded osteopenia was 9.3 year.
Table 1 State of bone mineral density in children with TS with different
karyotype.
X-chromosome
45,X
45,X/46,XX
structural abnormalities
Karyotype
(nZ18)
(nZ4)
(nZ4)
P
BMD (g/cm2)
0.80G0.09
0.81G0.10
0.99G0.24
(PO0.05)
Z-score (SD)
(K)1.72G1.12
(K)1.30G1.53
(K)1.45G1.90
(PO0.05)
In patients with TS were determined statistically significant inverse correlation
between age and Z-score (rZ(K) 0.46, P!0.05), as well as between the level of
FSH and Z-score (rZ(K) 0.81, P!0.05).
Conclusion
Karyotype has not impact on BMD, osteopenia is present in all girls with different
variants of karyotype. In girls with TS the degree of bone metabolism disorders
progresses with age and degree of estrogen deficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP127
EP128
Osteocalcin as a marker of bone metabolism disorders in girl with
Turner syndrome
Nataliya Zelinska1, Iryna Shevchenko2 & Evgenia Globa3
1N. Zelinska, Kiev, Ukraine;2I. Shevchenko, Kiev, Ukraine;3E. Globa,
Kiev, Ukraine.
Background
One of the markers of bone metabolism is osteocalcin (OC) and Its elevated level
indicates osteoporosis.
Objective and hypotheses
We investigated the OC level in 14 girls with TS (45,X (nZ8), 45,X/46,XX
(nZ3), structural abnormalities of chromosome X (nZ3): seven patients at 4-11
year and 7 - at 12-18 year.
Method
DEXA (Z-score, S.D.), serum levels of OC, FSH, LH, estradiol.
Results
We observed violations of bone tissue by DEXA at 76.87% girls with TS: namely
the osteoporosis - at 30.66%, osteopenia - at 46.21%. Mean OC levels did not
differ significantly in girls with TS, aged 4-11 year (98.59G41.11 ng/ml) and 12-
18 year. (91.98G51.83 ng/ml, PO0.05), but were higher than children in control
age group: 46.23G12.43 ng/ml (P!0.05), and 51.12G22.64 ng/ml (P!0.05),
respectively. No significant differences were found of OC level in patients
with different karyotype: 45,X - 102.00G36.62 ng/ml, 45,X/46,XX- 53.92G
46.04 ng/ml and structural abnormalities of chromosome X-117.59G55.30 ng/ml
(PO0.05). No statistically significant association was found of OC level with the
content of FSH, LH, estradiol, the degree of bone metabolism (Z- score). At the
same time the OC level was higher than the age normal in 60.03% of TS girls over
12 years, and was normal in all patients 4-11 yrear. OC level was elevated in
100% patients with osteoporosis (Z- score O (K)2.5 S.D.) and in 75.0% - with
osteopenia (Z-score of (K) 1.0-2.5 S.D.).
Conclusion
The level of the OC in girls with TS was not dependent on its age, karyotype and
content of sex hormones. In 71.43% of all girls with TS and in 100.0% with
osteoporosis OC level was higher than the normal age indices. Research OC
should be carried out to all girls with TS for early detection of osteoporosis and
holding his treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP128
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP129
Adrenal tumors in menopause: bone assessment
Adina Ghemigian1, Mara Carsote1, Anda Dumitrascu2, Nicoleta Dumitru2,
Ana Valea3, Gabriela Voicu2 & Constantin Dumitrache1
1C.Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy & C.I.Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2C.I.Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;3I.Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy & Clinical County Hospital, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania.
Introduction
Menopause correlates endocrine dysfunctions; whether an adrenal incidentaloma
represents one of these it is difficult to establish since an age-dependent pattern of
incidence has been described. Bone assays are necessary according to years since
last menstruation but also if persistent hypercortisolemia is confirmed.
Aim
This is a series of cases incidentally found with an adrenal tumor (AT) and
osteopenia while evaluation of their menopausal status.
Results
Sixty six year female accuses intermittent hot flushes and recurrent urinary
infections. The menopause’s age is 49. She associates lupus erythematosus,
diabetes mellitus, an episode of stroke, and high blood pressure. A right AT was
accidently discovered at ultrasound. CT scan confirmed a mass of 1.6/1.9 cm. The
endocrine assay revealed non-secretor pattern: normal aldosteron/rennin ratio,
suppression of plasma morning cortisol (of 1.8 mUI/ml) after 2 days!2 mg
Dexametasone (DXM) with low-normal morning ACTH of 15 pg/ml (N:3-
66 pg/ml), plasma metanephrines and normetaneprines within normal ranges
(of
29.2 pg/ml,  N:10-90 pg/ml,  respective  of
51.4 pg/ml,  N:15-180 pg/ml).
Bone profile pointed low 25-hydroxyvitamin DZ8.52 ng/ml (N:30-100 ng/ml),
and  lowest  DXA  BMD  at  femoral  neckZ0.879 g/cm2,  T-scoreZK1.1 S.D.,
Z-scoreZK0.1 S.D.
Eighty three year female is diagnosed since menopause (at age of 50) with
calcified myomas. An ultrasound (and later CT scan) revealed a left AT of
3.7/2.5/3.4 cm.  She  presented  normal  medullo-adrenal  function,  as  well  as
aldosteron/rennin ratio. However, a subclinical hypercotisolemia was confirmed
and persisted for more than a decade (a value of plasma cortisol of 3 mg/dl after
2 days!2 mg DXM, ACTH of 3.15 pg/ml). Adrenalectomy was refused. Bone
profile was also investigated since the diagnosis of AT: osteopenia was stationary
during follow-up (lumbar BMD of 0.789 g/cm2, T-scoreZK1.8 S.D., Z-scoreZ
K0.1 S.D.) in association with vitamin D deficiency.
Conclusion
Adrenal tumors-related bone anomalies are more pronounced in menopause
correlated with physiological lack of estrogens. Mild persistent cortisol levels
may play a role in low BMD; however the exact component is difficult to establish
in this particular population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP129
EP129B
Similarities in postsurgical vs nonsurgical patients with hypoparathyr-
oidism: post hoc analysis from recombinant human parathyroid
hormone (rhPTH[1-84], parathyroid hormone rDNA) REPLACE study
Maria Luisa Brandi1, John P Bilezikian2, Bart L Clarke3, William Fraser4,
Alan Krasner5, Hjalmar Lagast6, Benjamin Li6, Michael Mannstadt7,
Lars Rejnmark8, Dolores M Shoback9 & Tamara J Vokes10
1Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, University of Florence, Florence,
Italy;2Division of Endocrinology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA;3Mayo Clinic Division
of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Rochester,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA;4Department of Medicine, Norwich Medical
School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK;5Shire Plc., Lexington,
Massachusetts, USA;6NPS Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Bedminster, New Jersey,
USA;7Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;8Endocrinology and Internal
Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark;9Endocrine
Research Unit, SF Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
University of California, San Francisco, California, USA;10Section of
Endocrinology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Hypoparathyroidism, a rare disorder characterized by absent or low levels of
parathyroid  hormone
(PTH),  often  results  from  thyroid  surgery.  However,
nonsurgical etiologies are present in O10% of patients. Data about this group of
patients are limited.
In this post hoc REPLACE (NCT00732615, EudraCT2008-005063-34) analysis,
baseline characteristics and response to 50-100 mg/day rhPTH(1-84) in patients
with postsurgical or nonsurgical hypoparathyroidism were evaluated. Demo-
graphic and baseline characteristics were compared between groups with chi-
square tests for categorical variables and one-way analysis of variance with effect
for continuous variables. Responders were defined as patients whose need for
conventional treatment with oral calcium and active vitamin D was reduced by
R50% while maintaining serum calcium at 2.00-2.25 mmol/l.
Of 124 randomized patients, 89 (72%) had postsurgical and 35 (28%) had
nonsurgical  hypoparathyroidism.  Interestingly  per  criteria  in  the
2015  ESE
guidelines, R80% of patients within each subgroup were not well controlled pre-
rhPTH(1-84) even after optimization with conventional treatment. Overall, there
were more  similarities than differences between the two groups. The only
significant differences between groups were male gender (9/89 [10%] vs 17/35
[49%]; P!0.0001), age at onset (49.1 vs 42.9 years, PZ0.014), and time since
diagnosis (12.1 vs 17.5 years, PZ0.008). At baseline, mean (S.D.) serum intact
PTH levels were 0.79 (0.94) and 0.37 (0.48) pmol/l in the postsurgical and
nonsurgical groups, respectively; healthy adult range is 1.48-7.63 pmol/l. In the
postsurgical  group, the
58%  responder  rate  with  rhPTH(1-84) (35/60)  was
significantly higher than the 3% rate with placebo (1/29; P!0.001). In the
nonsurgical group, the 46% responder rate in the rhPTH(1-84) group (11/24) was
numerically higher than the 0% placebo group rate (0/11; PZ0.007).
This post hoc analysis did not suggest any differences in response to PTH(1-84)
based on etiology of hypoparathyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP129B
EP130
Long-term use of steroid and secondary ostoporosis to multiple
displaced metatarsal stress fracture: with rheumatoid arthritis a case
report
Esra Demirel1, Kenan 
¸ adırcı2 & Kadri Yıldız3
1Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Training and Research
Hospıtal, Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Training and
Research Hospıtal, Erzurum, Turkey;3Orthopedics Medical Center, Ankara,
Turkey.
Introduction
In rheumatological diseases have been observed in a rate of 0.8% of non-
traumatic  insufficiency  fractures.  The  most  common  sites  of  insufficiency
fractures are pelvis, sacrum, tibia, the sections near to the insertion of the fibula,
calcaneus  and  buttocks.  Generally,  bone
- joint  involvement  in  rheumatic
diseases  and  osteoporosis  connected  with  prolonged  use  of  corticosteroids
prepares the ground for these insuffiency fractures. In this case, We aimed to
present the metatarsal fractures which we have identified in an unexpected
localization in a patient the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis who has been
secondary osteoporosis for a long time use of low-dose steroids.
Case Presantation
Approximately for 12 years with a diagnosis of Rheumatoid Arthritis, 53-year-old
male patient admitted because of the starting complaints pain and swelling in his
left foot since 25 days. The patient was using low-dose corticosteroids without a
break since approximately the last two years. In the verified surveys, performed in
and was verified avascular necrosis of the talus and common arthritic changes
depend  on  Rheumatoid  Arthritis  foot-  ankle  involvement,  there  were
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
sensitiveness with palpation and swelling in the metatarsal region of the patient’s
examination. In radiography,it was seen the displaced of 2nd, 3rd, 4th metatarsal
basis’ and nondisplaced fracture line in his 5th metatarsal basis, it was intact of
lisfrank joint.
The patient’s L1-L4 T-score was found of K3.2. The was learned that ever now
the patient didn’t receive any treatment about osteoporosis. The patient which
treated of orthopedic aspects, was started Alendronate sodium 70 mg and 2800 IU
Vitamin D3 treatment
Discussion
The frequency of osteoporosis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) ranges
from 4 to 24% and the frequency of osteopenia ranges from 28 to 61.9%.
Glucocorticoid use was associated with decreased bone mass in 56.2% of subjects
with RA.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP130
EP131
Barrett’s esophagus and osteopenia: Report of a case
Panagiotis Athanassiou1, Aikaterini Tzanavari1, Anestis Spyridis1,
Markos Kostopoulos1, Eleni Xanthakou2 & Ifigenia Kostoglou-
Athanassiou3
1
Department of Rheumatology, St. Paul’s Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;
2Endocrinologist, Sparti, Greece;3Department of Endocrinology, Red Cross
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Barrett’s esophagus is metaplasia in the cells of the lower end of the esophagus. It
is characterized by the replacement of the normal stratified squamous epithelium
lining of the esophagus by simple columnar epithelium with goblet cells. The
disease  is  often  related  to  gastroesophageal  reflux  and  patients  have  pain
necessitating chronic usage of proton pump inhibitors. Proton pump inhibitors
have been associated with the development of low bone mineral density.
Aim
The aim was to describe the case of a patient with Barrett’s esophagus and chronic
proton pump inhibitor usage who developed osteopenia.
Case report
A male patient aged 67 presented with diffuse musculoskeletal pain. He had a
10 year history of Barrett’s esophagus. He was being followed for Barrett’s
esophagus and had been taking proton pump inhibitors for the treatment of pain.
Laboratory  investigations  performed  revealed
25(OH)D3
33 ng/ml
(normal
values  O30 ng/ml).  Radiology  of  the  spine  revealed  osteopenic  vertebrae.
Bone mineral density was measured and revealed a T score of K2.3. The patient
had normal testosterone levels and a negative family history of osteoporosis.
Vitamin D and calcium orally were administered.
Conclusion
The administration of proton pump inhibitors appears to be associated with low
bone mineral density and an increased fracture risk (Fournier et al. 2009, Fraser
et al. 2013). In patients with chronic, albeit benign, gastrointestinal disorders, care
should be taken that treatment with proton pump inhibitors be limited to the needs
of the patients, thus preventing a skeletal side effect, such as osteoporosis.
References
Fournier MR et al. Proton pump inhibitors, osteoporosis, and osteoporosis related
fractures. Maturitas 2009; 64: 9-13.
Fraser LA et al. The effect of proton pump inhibitors on fracture risk: report
from the Canadian Multicenter Osteoporosis Study. Osteoporos Int 2013; 24:
1161-1168.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP131
EP132
Osteoporosis and recurrent pathological fractures associated with
intense cannabinoid use: a case report
Goknur Yorulmaz1, Eskisehir Emel Gonullu2 & Nazim Karakus3
1Endocrinology Department, State Hospital, Eskisehir, Turkey;
2Rheumatology Department, Eskisehir State Hospital, Eskisehir, Turkey;
3Orthopedics and Traumatology Department, Eskisehir State Hospital,
Eskisehir, Turkey.
Introduction
Cannabis/marijuana/cannabinoids are the most commonly used illicit drug in the
world which can be originated from plants or can be in synthetic forms. Here, an
intensive marijuana smoker, 33 years old patient, who has osteoporosis with
recurrent pathologic fractures will be presented.
Case
Thirty-three-years-old male patient was referred to the our clinics in order to
investigate the causes that may lead a pathologic fracture because the patient had
the tibia and fibula fracture without any obvious trauma. The patient’s blood
calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, vitamin D and parathyroid hormone
levels were normal. There were no signs and symptoms that can be suggestive of
malignancy. Excluding the secondary osteoporpsis reasons. Bone mineral density
was measured with dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and T-score of L1-
L4ZK2.9, T-score of the femoral neckZK2.3. We asked him whether he uses
any drug for any reason. He answered that he had started to use cannabis when he
was fourteen and since then, he has been using the canabinoid as 19-20/day in the
form of cigarettes additionally in the form of inhalation and sometimes synthetic
forms. He said he had treated for the broken bones (one time for his hand and one
time for his foot) twice by an orthopedist before this event. Pathological fractures
of the patient were attributed to his intensive cannabis smoking.
Conclusion
Important roles of the cannabinoid receptors during osteoporosis process have
been shown by the investigators. We considered our case as cannabinoid-induced
osteoporosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP132
EP133
Paget’s disease of bone - case report and a review of epidemiology,
pathophysiology and management
Pop Radu Cristina Corina
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tirgu Mures, Romania.
Introduction
Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is the second-most-common metabolic bone
disease, after osteoporosis, affecting about 3% of the population at age over 40
years. This disease is characterized by excessive and abnormal bone remodeling
due to increased bone resorption followed by disorganized bone formation.
This paper will include a case report and a review of PDB epidemiology and
pathophysiology, complications and clinical findings, indications for treatment,
and the drugs currently available to treat this condition.
Case report
Sixty four years old woman, who addressed to our department in March 2011 for
chronic left hip and low back pain, with insidious onset which has increased over
time,  fatigue,  headaches  attacks  with  occipital  localization  associated  with
dizziness and intracranial pressure. The evaluation of phospho-calcic metabolism
showed normocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, normocalciuria, hyperphosphaturia,
normal serum parathyroid hormone level, 25-hydroxy vitamin D level decreased
(19 ng/ml) and alkaline phosphatase level increased (572 U/l). Bone scintigraphy
revealed intense uptake of radiopharmaceutical in the left femur. The bones
X-rays and computed tomography of the left femur showed marked thickening
and sclerosis of cortical bone with inhomogeneous ossification of bone structure,
osteolysis and small subchondral cystic lesions. Medical treatment was initiated
with alendronate, calcium and vitamin D, with favorable evolution during the
next  months.  Long  term  follow-up  is  required  for  monitoring  related
complications.
Keywords: Paget’s disease of bone, bone resorption, alendronate
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP133
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP134A
Depression, Obesity, and Elbow Fracture: a Pathogenic Triangle?
Mara Carsote1, Valentin Radoi2, Ana Valea3, Simona Elena Albu4,
Cristina Vasiliu4 & Adina Ghemigian1
1C. Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy & C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2Romanian Association of
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Bucharest, Romania;3I.Hatieganu
University of Medicine and Pharmacy & Clinical County Hospital,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania;4C.Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy &
University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Depression and associated medication, especially Selective Serotonin Reuptake
Inhibitors, may associate high fracture risk through serotonin (but not only).
Obesity has been recently proved to be correlated with a higher fracture risk for a
few sites as ankle, elbow, shoulder, etc. Moreover, depression and some anti-
depressants may increase the calories intake and consecutive increased of Body
Mass Index (BMI) is registered.
Aim
We present a fragility fracture medical history in a context of depression and
obesity as only obvious causes of osteoporosis.
Material and Methods
The bone profile is analyzed in this case report.
Results
Fifty seven year old non-smoking female patient was diagnosed with multi-
nodule goiter at age of 49 and total thyroidectomy was performed. Substitution
with daily levothyroxine was continued up to present with consecutive normal
TSH levels.
Menstruation stopped at 50 years; she suffered of chronic headache. At age of 53
she was diagnosed with depression and she was offered different types of anti-
depressive medication for almost 3 years. At age of 56 she suffered a left elbow
fracture and the circumstances of fall indicated an osteoporotic type.
Endocrine check-up was done at that moment. The patient had a BMI of
40 kg/m2; 25-hydroxyvitamin D assay showed an inadequate level of 20.8 ng/ml
(N:30-100 ng/ml), with normal bone turnover markers: blood CrossLaps of
0.44 ng/ml
(N:0.226-1.008 ng/ml), blood  osteocalcin of
25.71 ng/ml (N:15-
46 ng/ml),  and  circulating  serotonin  of
280 ng/ml  (N:80-450 ng/ml).  Dual-
Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry showed lumbar L1-4 Bone Mineral Density
(BMD) of 1.049 g/cm2, T-scoreZK1.1 S.D., Z-scoreZK1.4 S.D. Weekly oral
risendronat with daily vitamin D/calcium supplements were followed for 1 year:
BMD increased to 1.14 g/cm2, T-scoreZK0.3 S.D., Z-scoreZK0.5 S.D.
Conclusion
Obesity and depression might associate vitamin D deficiency. Depression and
anti-depressants may act on fall risk by attention and gait anomalies. However,
both conditions may be not associated relevant BMD changes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP134A
EP134B
Negative correlation of osteocalcin with insulin resistance, but not with
body fat, in lamin-mutated lipodystrophies
Marion Leclerc1, Kanza Benomar1, George Lion1, Claire Douillard1,
Corinne Vigouroux3, Pascal Pigny1 & Marie-Christine Vantyghem1,2
1Lille University Hospital, Lille, France;2INSERM 1190, Lille, France;
3Pierre and Marie Curie University, Paris, France.
Bone  is  involved  in  both  phosphate-calcium  and  energetic  metabolism.
Osteocalcin,  secreted  by  the  osteoblasts,  stimulates  insulin  secretion  and
improves  insulin  sensitivity.  FGF-23,  secreted  by  the osteoclasts, increases
phosphate urinary excretion and is a marker of insulin resistance. Relationship
between insulin-resistance, body fat and bone metabolism remains unclear.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate osteocalcin and FGF-23 levels in
diseases differing by body fat and insulin resistance levels, using lipodystrophies,
as a model of insulin-resistance without obesity, obese people with and without
insulin-resistance, and control subjects.
The population, recruited from the PHRC-Clin.gov2009-AO-1169-48 trial, was
divided in five groups: LMNA-mutated lipodystrophies (LDM, nZ11), non-
mutated lipodystrophies (LDNM, nZ21), obese diabetic patients (OD, nZ13),
obese non-diabetic patients (OND, nZ13), normal-weighed controls (T, nZ19).
Bone and metabolic biomarkers, as well as DEXA-assessed body composition
were compared between these five groups.
Osteocalcin,  crosslaps, leptin, BMI, body fat mass, lean-body-mass/height2,
fasting  blood  glucose  and  C  peptide,  HbA1c  and  HOMA-IR  levels  were
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
significantly different between the five groups, with a trend for T-score, calcemia
and 25-OHD. Blood phosphate, PTH, FGF-23 and urinary calcium levels were
similar.
The two-by-two groups comparison showed a lower level of osteocalcin in the
LDNM  (median  (IQR):  12  (11-14) ng/ml)  and  LDM  (14  (12-19))  groups
compared to controls (24 (23-29)), and in the LDNM compared to OND (17 (13-
21))  groups.  Osteocalcin  was  correlated  positively  to  crosslaps
(rZ0.74,
P!0.0001) and negatively to HOMA-IR (LDNM:4 (0.6-11); LDM:3 (2-5);
OD:4 (3-6); OND:1.6 (1-3); T:1.1 (0.8-1.4); rZK0.50, P!0.0001), lean-body-
mass/height2 (rZK0.41, PZ0.0003) and T-score (rZK0.35, PZ0.0024), but
not to body fat or leptin (LDNM:15 (8-22); LDM:6 (4-12); OD:27 (24-41);
OND:49 (32-67); T:5 (4-12) ng/ml).
Conclusion
The comparison of subjects differing by the level of insulin-resistance and body
fat, two characteristics often confounded, shows that osteocalcin is negatively
correlated with insulin-resistance and T-score, without any influence of body fat
or leptin. The role of lean mass in the regulation of osteocalcin has to be further
investigated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP134B
Calcium and Vitamin D metabolism
EP135
From pseudohypoparathyroidism to inactivating PTH/PTHrP signaling
disorder (iPPSD), a novel classification proposed by the European
EuroPHP-network
Susanne Thiele1, Giovanna Mantovani2, Anne Barlier3, Valentina Boldrin2,
Paolo Bordogna2, Francesca Elli2, Kathleen Freson4, Intza Garin5,
Patrick Hanna6,7, Benedetta Izzi4, Olaf Hiort1, Beatriz Lecumberri8,
Arrate Pereda5, Luisa De Sanctis9, Vrinda Saraff10, Serap Turan11,
Alessia Usardi6, Ralf Werner1, Guiomar Perez de Nanclares5 &
Agnès Linglart6,7
1Division of Experimental Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Depart-
ment of Pediatrics, University of Lubeck, Lubeck, Germany;2Fondazione
IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Endocrinology and
Diabetology Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy;3APHM, Hôpital la Conception,
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Marseille, France;4Department of
Cardiovascular Sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology,
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;5Molecular (Epi)Genetics
Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, Hospital Universitario
Araba-Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain;6APHP, Reference Center for
Rare Disorders of the Mineral Metabolism, Filière OSCAR and Plateforme
d’Expertise Maladies Rares Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France;
7INSERM U1169, Hôpital Bicêtre et Université Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin
Bicêtre, France;8Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, La Paz
University Hospital, Castellana 261, Madrid, Spain;9Department of Public
Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy;
10Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Birmingham Children’s
Hospital, Birmingham, UK;11Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Marmara University, Instanbul, Turkey.
Background
Disorders caused by impairments in the parathyroid hormone (PTH) signaling
pathway are historically classified under the term pseudohypoparathyroidism
(PHP), that encompasses rare, related but highly heterogeneous diseases with
demonstrated
(epi)genetic  causes.  The  actual  classification  is  based  on  the
presence or absence of specific clinical and biochemical signs together with an
in vivo response to exogenous PTH and the results of an in vitro assay to measure
Gsa protein activity. However, this classification does not take into consideration
other related diseases like acrodysostosis (ACRDYS) or Progressive Osseous
Heteroplasia (POH), as well as recent findings of clinics and genetic/epigenetic
background of the different subtypes.
Objective
The EuroPHP network decided to develop a new classification that encompasses
all disorders with impairments in PTH and/or PTHrP cAMP-mediated pathway.
Design and Methods
Extensive  review  of  the  literature  was  performed.  Several  meetings  were
organized to discuss about a new, more effective and accurate way to describe
disorders caused by abnormalities of the PTH signaling pathway.
Results and Conclusions
After choosing major and minor criteria that need to be considered for the
diagnosis of these disorders, we propose to group them under the term of
‘inactivating  PTH/PTHrP  signaling  disorders’,
(iPPSD).  This  terminology:
1) defines the common mechanism responsible for all diseases, 2) does not
require a confirmed genetic defect, 3) avoids ambiguous terms like “pseudo”,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
4) eliminates the clinical or molecular overlap between diseases. We believe that
the use of this nomenclature and classification will facilitate the development of
rationale  and  comprehensive  international  guidelines  for  the  diagnosis  and
treatment of iPPSDs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP135
EP136
Vitamin D deficiency in pregnancy associates with increased emotional
and behavioral problems at preschool age: the Rhea pregnancy cohort,
Crete, Greece
Vasiliki Daraki1,2, Theano Roumeliotaki1, Georgia Chalkiadaki1,
Andrew Margioris3, Katerina Koutra1, Marianna Katrinaki3,
Andriani Kyriklaki1, Mariza Kampouri1, Stathis Papavasiliou2,
Manolis Kogevinas4 & Leda Chatzi1
1Faculty of Medicine, Department of Social Medicine, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Crete, Greece;2Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and
Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece;
3
Lab of Clinical Chemistry-Biochemistry, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete,
Greece;4National School of Public Health, Athens, Greece.
Background and aims
Vitamin D deficiency during the perinatal period has been hypothesized to
increase risk for several psychiatric disorders in humans. As newborn vitamin D
levels are entirely dependent on maternal vitamin D status, vitamin D deficiency
in utero may leave the infant vulnerable to cognitive defects and behavioral
problems.  Few  human  studies  have  examined  these  associations  with
inconclusive  results.  We  aimed  to  investigate  the  associations  of  maternal
25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH) D] levels with offspring neurodevelopment at
4 years of age, using data from a longitudinal, prospective pregnancy cohort,
‘Rhea’ study in Crete, Greece.
Design and methods
We included 471 mother-child pairs. Maternal vitamin D status was estimated by
measuring plasma concentration of 25(OH) D at the first prenatal visit (13G2.4
weeks). Cognitive function at 4 years was assessed by means of the McCarthy
Scales of Children’s Abilities (MSCA). Emotional and behavioral development at
4 years was assessed by means of Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)
and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Test. Multivariable linear
regression analyses were used to estimate the effect of maternal vitamin D status
on child neurodevelopment.
Results
Maternal vitamin D deficiency during early pregnancy was associated with a
significant score increase in total SDQ (b-coef: 2.07, 95%CI: 0.25, 3.89) scale and
specifically in peer relationship problems (b-coef: 0.58, 95%CI: 0.03, 1.12) and
hyperactivity/inattention (b-coef: 1.15, 95%CI: 0.36, 1.94) subscales at 4 years of
age. Similarly maternal vitamin D deficiency was associated with five points
increase in the total ADHD score (b-coef: 5.36, 95%CI: 0.75, 9.98), and two
points increase in the hyperactivity subscale score (b-coef: 2.26, 95%CI: 0.25,
4.26) at 4 years of age. Maternal thyroid function in pregnancy or maternal
obesity did not modify the observed associations.
Conclusion
Vitamin D deficiency in early pregnancy was associated with increased emotional
and behavioral problems at preschool age.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP136
EP137
Mass Spectrometry coupled with liquid chromatography
(HPLC-MS-MS) levels of 25-hydroxy vitamin D (25OHVitD) are
associated with prognostic markers of Heart Failure
Federica Saponaro1, Alessandro Saba2, Sabina Frascarelli2,
Claudio Marcocci1, Filomena Cetani1, Claudio Passino3 &
Riccardo Zucchi2
1Endocrinology 2, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy;2Laboratory of
Biochemistry, Department of Pathology, Pisa, Italy;3Cardiology Unit,
Fondazione Toscana Gabriele Monasterio, Pisa, Italy.
Introduction and aims
Heart failure
(HF) is a health problem with poor prognosis, despite many
treatments available. Vitamin D is the pre-hormone of the active calcitriol
(1,25(OH)2D3). It is involved in bone homeostasis, but recent studies suggest
extraskeletal functions, including pleiotropic effects on cardiovascular system and
a relationship between low levels of 25OHvitamin D and worse HF prognosis.
The aims of the study were: 1) to define 25OH-D levels in the HF population, 2) to
correlate25 OHD levels and HF outcome markers (biochemical and instrumental
evaluation) in the hypothesis that vitamin D represents a potential modifiable
factor risk in HF.
Materials and Methods
We performed a retrospective study on 261 consecutive HF patients (NHYA1-3),
collecting clinical, biochemical and instrumental data (echocardiography and
cardiopulmonary exercise test - CPET). We retrieved stored blood samples
collected at the baseline and developed a fast isotope dilution Mass Spectrometry
coupled with Liquid Chromatography (HPLC-MS-MS) method for accurate
measurement of 25OHvitaminD levels.
Results
Patients were 47 females and 214 males (ratio M:FZ4:1), with a mean age of
65G12 years and mean BMI of 28G14. They had stable HF disease in prevalent
NYHA2 class. Mean EF (ejection fraction) was 33G8%; patients had mild kidney
failure (creatinine 1.12G0.3 mg/dl) and they were normocalcemic and normo
PTH. Levels of 25OH vitamin ranged 2-45 ng/ml, with mean of 17G9 ng/ml.
Twenty-five pecent (nZ65) patients had vitamin deficiency (!10 ng/ml), 62%
(nZ161) had vitamin insufficiency (between10 and 30 ng/ml) and 13% (nZ35)
had vitamin O 30 ng/ml, without any supplementation. The linear regression
analysis showed that 25OHvitaminD levels were positively correlated with CPET
paramethers and negatively with mortality Mecki score and this relation was even
stronger in patient with Vitamin D insufficiency.
Conclusion
Our study revealed a strong association between variables from CPET, a well-
recognized valuable tool for HF prognosis and 25OHvitaminD levels, detected
with a new and accurate method, HPLCMS-MS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP137
EP138
Increasing incidence of parathyroid carcinoma - a nationwide study
Eeva M Ryhänen1, Helena Leijon2, Saara Metso3, Eija Eloranta4,
Pirkko Korsoff5, Leo Niskanen1, Petteri Ahtiainen6, Paivi Kekäläinen7,
Marjo Tamminen8, Raija Ristamaki9, Otto Knutar10, Eliisa Loyttyniemi11,
Ilkka Heiskanen12, Matti J. Välimäki1, Caj Haglund12,13, Johanna Arola2 &
Camilla Schalin-Jäntti1
1Division of Endocrinology, Abdominal Center, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland;2Department of Pathology,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland;
3Department of Internal Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere,
Finland;4Department of Internal Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu,
Finland;5Department of Internal Medicine, Satakunta Central Hospital,
Pori, Finland;6Department of Internal Medicine, Central Finland Central
Hospital, Jyväskylä, Finland;7Department of Internal Medicine, North
Carelia Central Hospital, Joensuu, Finland;8Department of Internal
Medicine, Kymenlaakso Central Hospital, Kotka, Finland;9Department of
Oncology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland;10Department of
Internal Medicine, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland;11Department of
Biostatistics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland;12Department of Surgery,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland;
13Research Programs Unit, Translational Cancer Biology, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Introduction and design
Parathyroid carcinoma (PC) is a rare endocrine malignancy and the diagnosis is
difficult.  As the  incidence  seems  to  be  increasing,  we  examined  all  cases
diagnosed in our country during years 2000-2011 and compared the results to
those of atypical parathyroid (AA; nZ28) and parathyroid adenomas (A; nZ72).
All tissue specimens were re-examined.
Results
In 2000-2011, 32 patients were diagnosed with PC in Finland, compared to
19 cases in 1980-1999. Preoperatively, PC patients (median age 61 year, range
17-83) had higher ionized calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH) concen-
trations compared to AA and A (1.76, 1.56 and 1.44 mmol/l, P!0.001; and 989,
355 and 160 mmol/l, P!0.001 respectively). They were more often hospitalized
for severe hypercalcemia (44% vs 22% and 3%, respectively, PZ0.01) and more
often suffered from renal (50% vs 48% vs 22%, respectively, PZ0.01) and bone
involvement (47% vs 15% vs 38%, respectively PZ0.002).
Tumor size was larger in PC and AA compared to A (2.95 cm vs 2.0 cm vs
1.6 cm, respectively, P!0.001). Histopathology revealed significant differences
in growth patterns, prevalence of fibrous septae, hemosiderin deposits, Ki-67 and
parafibromin staining between the subgroups. The hallmarks of PC, i.e vascular,
capsular and perineural invasion were present in 72, 72 and 9% of PC tissue
specimens,  respectively. After  primary  surgery  and a  median  follow-up  of
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
6.7 years, 9.4% of PC patients had residual and 21% recurrent disease (47% had
R 2 operations, 22% radiotherapy, 13% chemotherapy), and 9.4% died of the
disease. Overall mortality did not differ between the subgroups (PZ0.94).
Conclusions
The prevalence of parathyroid carcinoma has increased significantly in Finland.
Parathyroid carcinoma associates with significantly more severe PHPT compared
to adenoma, and has distinct histopathological findings.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP138
EP139
Abstract withdrawn.
EP140
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia secondary to a novel mutation
causing severe hypercalcemia
Natasha Shrikrishna, Syuhada Mohamed, Maeve Middleton &
Stephen Wong
Department of Endocrinology Glan Clwd Hospital, North Wales, UK.
Introduction
Familial Hypocalciuric Hypercalcemia (FHH) is a benign autosomal dominant
condition caused by an inactivating mutation on the gene coding for the Calcium
Sensing Receptor (CASR). CASR plays a role in regulating parathyroid secretion
and calcium metabolism. The majority of adults with FHH are asymptomatic.
This is a case of three young brothers whose genetic tests shows two mutations in
each of their CASR gene leading to hypercalcemia and varying symptoms.
Case
A 20-year-old man was being investigated for a non-epileptic seizure and an
incidental  finding  of  a  serum  calcium
3.21 mmol/l  was  found.  On  further
questioning, he had been complaining of muscle aches, joint pains and fatigue.
Subsequent investigations showed paired PTH 2.1-4.6 nmol/l, PTHrP !0.7,
calcium excretion index 0.006 - 0.0006 and 24 h urine calcium of 1.6 mmol/24 h.
His sestambi scan revealed no parathyroid adenoma and his DEXA scan showed
osteopenia. A detailed family history was obtained indicating his mother had
suffered from renal stones secondary to hypercalcemia. His siblings were also
tested  which  revealed  two  brothers  with  hypercalcemia.  Interestingly,  the
symptoms vary with his brothers, with one being asymptomatic. Genetic testing
in all three have revealed the same two mutations for each brother:
Heterozygous for c.553COT (p.Arg185X)
Heterozygous for unclassified variant c.1375COA (p.Gln459Lys)
This second mutation is an unknown variant, which has not been reported in
literature. Genetic testing of the parents has shown one altered copy gene in each.
First line treatment, Cinacalcet has been used for the symptomatic brothers with
one brother showing benefit.
Conclusion
This  case  illustrates  a  novel  double  heterozygous  affecting  each  brother
differently. Considering most cases of FHH are asymptomatic, two of the kindred
are severely affected as in neonatal hyperparathyroidism. The next step would be
to consider a parathyroidectomy to reduce complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP140
EP141
Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia: presenting in childhood, diagnosed
in adulthood - case report
Catarina Silvestre, Raquel Paixão, José Maria Aragués, Sílvia Guerra &
Mário Mascarenhas
Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
Hypercalcemia can be caused by a variety of pathologies/factors. Vitamin D plays
a central role in calcium homeostasis, where a tight control of its metabolism is
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
necessary.  Inadequate
24-hydroxylase-enzime
(CYP24A1)  activity  leads  to
failure  of
25-hydroxyvitamin  and
1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin  D3
inactivation,
resulting in hypercalcemia.
Case report
An  asymptomatic,
22-year-old  woman  was  admitted  in  an  Endocrinology
appointment  for  evaluation  of  persisting  hypercalcemia
(10.5-11.6 mg/dl).
Medical history revealed that the patient suffered a transient period of polyuria
during  childhood
(4-5-years-old),  diagnosed  as  recurrent  cystitis.  Currently
without any known disease or medication. Born to nonconsaguineous parents; no
other  known  familial  cases.  Further  evaluation  revealed:  hypercalciuria,
suppressed parathyroid hormone (PTH) and elevated 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin
D3; with normal levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3, serum phosphorus, creatinine
and angiotensin converting enzyme. A renal ultrasound demonstrated medullary
nephrocalcinosis. Sequence analysis of the CYP24A1 gene was performed,
revealing  the  patient  has  two  mutations  in  heterozygosity:  c.1186CO
T(p.Arg396Trp) and c.1226TOC(p.Leu409Ser). Analytic and genetic study of
first-degree relatives was performed. The father is homozygous for the c.1186CO
T(p.Arg396Trp) mutation, with decreased level of PTH. The mother is a carrier of
the c.1226TOC(p.Leu409Ser) mutation, in heterozygosity; with normal analytic
evaluation. A 15-year-old sister has the same two mutations as the patient, with
hypercalcemia, decreased PTH and medullary nephrocalcinosis. A low-calcium
diet, avoidance of vitamin D supplements and sun protection were recommended.
Conclusion
Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia is an autosomal recessively inherited disease,
with an unknown prevalence. This particular case allows emphasizing two main
problematics. Firstly, the diagnosis of the underlying cause of hypercalcemia in
Endocrinology turns out to be more complex, as the vitamin D has an important
role besides PTH. Secondly, the identification of patients with this disease as an
at-risk  group  brings  a  new  aspect  to  the  debate  concerning  vitamin  D
supplementation. More studies are necessary to understand the severity of this
disease over time.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP141
EP142
Atypical cases of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia: utility of genetic
testing in the diagnosis
Fernando García1, Guillermo Martínez de Pinillos1, Mariana Tomé2,
Ignacio Fernández1, Ignacio Fernández1, Eyvee Arturo Cuéllar1, José
Álvaro Romero1, Juan Manuel García de Quirós1 & María Victoria Cózar1
1Hospital Universitario de Valme, Sevilla, Spain;2Hospital Punta de
Europa, Gibraltar, Spain.
Introduction
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) has been classically characterized
as an  asymptomatic  disease  with  mild hypercalcemia,  hypocalciuria  and
inappropriately normal or high serum PTH concentration. The aim of our study
is to assess the utility of genetic testing in patients with suspected FHH with
atypical  clinical  manifestations,  and  the  validity  of  classical  biochemical
parameters for the diagnosis.
Description of methods
A retrospective study of seven patients with HHF confirmed by genetic testing
was conducted. The following variables were measured: calcemia, phosphatemia,
renal  function,  serum  PTH,
25-hydroxyvitamin  D,
24-h  calciuria,  urinary
calcium/creatinine clearance ratio (UCCR) and type of mutation.
Results
Mean age 51.4G16.2 years. Average serum calcium 11.1 mg/dl G0.4. Two
patients had values above 11.5 mg/dl. Average PTH 51.8 pg/ml G27.3. Mean
urinary  calcium  was
166 mg  24 hG113.6.  Five  patients  presented
24-hour
calciuria O100 mg/24 h. The UCCR was !0.01 in five patients, between 0.01
and 0.02 in one patient and O0.02 in one patient although intermittently. In those
patients with calciuria O100 mg/24 h, the UCCR was less than 0.01 in three
cases, between 0.01 and 0.02 in one case and one patient alternated UCCR values
between 0.01 and 0.02 and above 0.02. Previously to the diagnosis, two patients
underwent not curative parathyroidectomy. Three different types of mutation of
CaSR gene were observed in genetic testing, one of which has not been previously
described in literature (C.2101 COG).
Conclusion
The isolated use of classical clinical parameters for the diagnosis of HFF can
determine errors in the diagnosis of those patients with atypical presentations. We
believe that UCCR is preferable to the absolute value of 24-h calciuria, as some
patients show no frank hypocalciuria. In these patients, genetic studies can help to
avoid unnecessary surgical interventions as well as excessive costs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP142
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP143
Sensitivity of localization studies performed by various radiologists
whom are not precisely experienced in the evaluation parathyroid
lesions
Pinar Sisman1, Ozen Oz Gul1, Coskun Demirtas2, Aybuke Muti2,
Onur Elbasan2, Ozlem Saraydaroglu3, Soner Cander1, Canan Ersoy1 &
Erdinc Erturk1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Uludag University Medical
School, Bursa, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Uludag
University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey;3Department of Pathology,
Uludag University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey.
Objectives
Preoperative imaging studies are being commonly used in primary hyperpar-
athyroid patients to increase cure rate and to decrease complication rate of
surgery. In this study we correlated the surgical outcomes with localization
studies performed by various radiologists.
Method
A total of 174 patients with primary hyperparathyroidism in which healing of
hypercalcemia achieved by parathyroidectomy were evaluated retrospectively.
Since our hospital is a teaching hospital numerous radiologists were trained
during  the  period  of
2005  to
2015.  For  that  reason  preoperative  cervical
ultrasound (US) and sestamibi scan (MIBI) had been carried out by various
examiners. According to laterality, imaging studies were categorized as true or
false positive, or true or false negative, and sensitivity and specificity rates were
calculated.
Results
A total of 184 lesions were excised from 174 patients (162F/27M, 52.7G12.2
years of age). US and MIBI localization studies matched in 74 and 108 patients,
respectively. False positive, and false negative results for US was 3.3 and 68.4%
while false positive and false negative results for MIBI was 4.3 and 35.3%. We
calculated very similar results for specificity of US and MIBI 95.9 and 95.0%, but
sensitivity results were really far from satisfaction with 45.9% for US and 62.4%
for MIBI.
Conclusion
Experience of examiner in parathyroid imagining effects primarily sensitivity
but not specificity. Parathyroid surgeon should be well practiced to perform
ultrasonographic evaluation by himself before operation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP143
EP144
Bone mineral density is associated with hypercalciuria in primary
hyperparathyroidism
Dilek Gogas Yavuz1, Bahar Tekin2, F. Buket Bayram2 & M. Melin Uygur1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Marmara University Hospital, Marmara University School of
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Marmara
University Hospital, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Aim
The most common clinical presentation of primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT)
is asymptomatıc and it is diagnosed incidentally without developing complica-
tions.In our study, we aimed to examine the characteristics of participants with
primary hyperparathyroidism and the relationship between bone mineral density
(BMD) and hypercalciuria.
Methods
Consecutive 191 normocalciuric (24-h urinary calcium!400 mg/day) patients
with PHPT (51G13 years, F/M:155/36), 61 hypercalciuric (24-hour urinary
calciumO400 mg/day) patıents with PHPT (49.2G10 years, F/M:50/11) and 55
healthy controls (38.8G10, F/M:43/12) were included in the current study. Serum
calcium,  phosphorus,  parathyroid  hormone
(PTH),
25(OH)  vitamin  D  and
24-hour urinary calcium were measured in all three groups. DEXA method was
used for BMD measurement.
Results
Serum calcium levels were 11.8G0.9 mg/dl, 10.6G1.3 mg/dl and 9.6G0.3 mg/dl
(P! 0.0001), serum parathyroid hormone levels were 287G378.2 pg/ml, 212G
322 pg/ml and 61.3G28 pg/ml (P! 0.001) for hypercalciuric, normocalciuric
patients and control group respectively. 24-h urinary calcium levels were 600G
173 mg/day in hypercalciuric group, 196G106 mg/day in normocalciuric group
and 137G69 in healthy controls group (P!0.0001). Serum calcium levels were
observed  significantly  higher  and  serum  phosphorus  levels  were  observed
significantly lower in hypercalciuric group compared to normocalciuric group and
healthy control group (P!0.0001, PZ0.005). Serum PTH levels were observed
significantly higher in hypercalciuric group compared to normocalciuric group
(PZ0.03). 24-hour urinary calcium levels showed positive correlation with PTH
and  serum  calcium  levels
(rZK0.37,  rZ0.47,  P!0.0001)  and  negative
correlation  with  femur  neck  and  lomber  BMD  levels  in  PHPT  patients.
(rZK0.23,  PZ0.001;  rZK0.27,  PZ0.02).  Patients  whose  serum  calcium
levels were normal or mildly elevated were tested for CGR mutation and it
resulted negative.
Conclusion
Our study also showed that there is positive correlation between urinary calcium
levels and serum PTH levels in newly diagnosed PHPT patients. It also supports
the opinion that hypercalciuria could be a marker bone loss in PHPT patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP144
EP145
Bone mineral density measurement in newly diagnosed primary
hyperparathyroidism patients
Bahar Tekin1, M. Melin Uygur2, F. Buket Bayram1 & Dilek Gogas Yavuz2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Marmara University Hospital, Marmara
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Internal
Medicine, Section of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Marmara University
Hospital, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Aim
Clinical presentation of primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) differs between
populations. In this study, we aimed to examine bone mineral density (BMD) and
bone metabolism parameters in newly diagnosed and untreated PHPT patients in a
single endocrine center in İstanbul, Turkey.
Methods
Consecutive 256 PHPT patients (50.7G14 years, F/M:205/51) and 89 healthy
controls (38.8G10 years, F/M:67/22) were included in the study. Serum calcium,
phosphorus, parathyroid hormone (PTH), 25(OH) vitamin D, creatinine, 24-h
urinary calcium were measured. DEXA method was used for bone mineral
density (BMD) measurement.
Results
Twenty percent of PHPT patients were symptomatic and nephrolithiasis was
shown in 20.3% of the patients. Serum calcium levels were 11.2G1.3 mg/dl and
9.6G0.3 mg/dl (P! 0.0001), serum PTH levels were 273.4G374 pg/ml and
61.3G28 pg/ml (P!0.001) and serum 25OH D levels were 21.9G20.1 ng/ml
and 10.4G7.1 ng/ml (P!0.0001) for PHPT and control groups respectively. 24-h
urinary calcium levels were 294.4G213.9 mg/day in PHPT group and 137G
69.2 mg/day in healthy control group (P!0,0001). Femur neck BMD were
0.82G0.15 g/cm2  and 0.98G0.14 g/cm2  (P!0.0001) for PHPT and control
groups respectively. Femur neck and lumber BMDs, T and Z scores were
observed significantly lower in PHPT group compared to healthy controls group
(P!0.0001). Femur neck and lumber BMD levels showed negative correlation
with PTH in PHPT patients (rZK0.37, P!0.0001). There were osteoporosis in
13.4 percent (n:34) and osteopenıa in 9.9 percent (n:25) of PHPT patients.
Conclusion
In our group of patients osteoporosis was diagnosed lower than expected but
BMD measurements were lower in PHPT group. The results of this study show
that bone turnover is increased and bone mineral density is decreased in PHPT
patients, as stated in previous studies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP145
EP146
Serum calcium to phosphorous ratio (Ca/P) as a simple, inexpensive
screening tool in the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT)
Bruno Madeo1, Elda Kara1, Katia Cioni1, Silvia Vezzani1,
Manuela Simoni1,2 & Vincenzo Rochira1,2
1Unit of Endocrinology, Azienda USL of Modena, Modena, Italy;2Unit of
Endocrinology, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
Background
PHPT  is  often  overlooked/underdiagnosed.  Several  strategies
(biochemical
markers alone or combined in complex algorithms) have been investigated to
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
easily diagnose/screen PHPT, but PHPT diagnosis remains challenging at present,
especially in asymptomatic patients. As serum calcium (Ca) and phosphorous (P)
are inversely related in PHPT, the Ca/P ratio could be a good candidate tool for
PHPT diagnosis. Surprisingly, no literature data on Ca/P ratio are available,
despite they are very simple biochemical measurements largely available in any
clinical lab setting.
Aim
To investigate the Ca/P ratio diagnostic value in the diagnosis of PHPT.
Methods
Data retrospectively obtained from review charts of 97 patients with documented
PHPT (69 females; 28 males) [16 (17%) with severe hypercalcemia (O12 mg/dl);
44
(45%) mild hypercalcemia, 36 (38%) normocalcemic PHPT (NCHPT)] were
compared with those of 96 controls (C) (44 females; 52 males). Exclusion criteria:
age !18 years, severe chronic diseases, cancer, bone metabolic diseases, use of
medications affecting serum Ca. Biochemical measurements: PTH, Vitamin D,
serum Ca, P, albumin, and creatinine. Normal ranges: PTH (15-88 pg/ml), Ca
(8.5-11 mg/dl), P (2.5-5.1 mg/dl). SPSS 19.0 and SigmaPlot 11.0 were used for
statistics (group comparisons, ROC curves, cutoffs performance).
Results
Ca and PTH were significantly higher in PHPT [(Ca median:11; min-max:9.4-
15.5); (PTH 135.2; 57.6-1748)] than C [(Ca 9.4; 8.3-10.2); (PTH 32.1; 14-106.1)
(P!0.0001). P was significantly lower in PHPT (2.4; 1.4-3.9) than in C (3.5; 2.1-
4.5)
(P!0.0001). Ca/P ratio was significantly higher in PHPT than in C. ROC
curves analyses identified a cutoff of 3.5 for both Ca/P ratio and Ca/P ratio
obtained by using albumin corrected-Ca. The sensitivity and specificity were 86
and 87%, respectively for Ca/P ratio and 89 and 93%, respectively for corrected
Ca/P ratio (P!0.0001). The diagnostic value of Ca/P ratio performed better than
PTH and Ca used alone or in combination.
Conclusions
Ca/P ratio is a valuable highly sensitive, highly specific tool for the diagnosis of
PHPT. Since Ca/P is simple to obtain, easily accessible in every clinical and lab
setting worldwide, and inexpensive even when used in large sample size of
patients, this diagnostic tool could be useful for screening PHPT, especially in
patients accessing emergency rooms or in the general practitioner setting.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP146
EP147
Vitamin D status in infants during the first 9 months of age and its effect
on growth and other biochemical markers: a prospective cohort study
Manish Gutch1, Uday Mandal2 & Sukriti Kumar1
1King George Medical College, Lucknow, India;2LLRM Medical College,
Meerut, India.
Background
We planned this prospective cohort study in term newborn babies, with the
objective to determine the incidence of vitamin D deficiency in infancy and to
determine the level of vitamin D which triggers the physiological PTH axis of the
body so as to differentiate truly deficient from sufficient vitamin D status.
Methods
96 participants at birth were enrolled and followed up till 9 months of age. Serum
25OHD was estimated in cord blood at birth and at 14G1 weeks of life. 77
participants were followed up at 9 months for estimation of serum 25OHD, PTH,
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), calcium and phosphorus. Vitamin D deficiency was
defined as serum
25OHD, PTH, Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), calcium and
phosphorus. Vitamin D deficiency was defined as serum 25OHD.
Results
Serum 25OHD levels at 9 months of age (15.78G8.97 ng/ml) were significantly
increased in comparison to the level of 3 months of age (14.04G7.10 ng/ml) and
at birth (8.94G2.24 ng/ml). At birth all the participants (77) were deficient in
25OHD levels. It was found that 16/94 (17%)and 19/77 (24.7%) participants at
3 and 9 months of age respectively became vitamin D sufficient without any
vitamin D supplementation. There was a significant inverse correlation between
serum 25OHD and PTH concentration (rZK0.522, P!0.001) serum 25OHD
and ALP(rZK.501, P!0.001). It was found that reduction in serum vitamin D
level to below 10.25 ng/ml results in surge of serum PTH.
Conclusion
Vitamin D deficiency is common from birth to 9 months of age but incidence
decreases spontaneously even without supplementation. Also large number of
babies may be falsely labelled as vitamin D deficient with currently followed
cutoffs. So a new cutoff for vitamin D deficiency needs to be established for
neonates and infants.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP147
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP148
New onset of epileptic seizures induced by Fahr’s syndrome secondary
to idiopatic hypoparathyroidism
Cristina Alina Silaghi1,2, Carmen Emanuela Georgescu2, Cristina Ghervan2,
Ana Valea2, Ramona Irimia1, Daniel Tudor Cosma3, Sanda Petrus4,
Alina Filip5, Horatiu Silaghi6 & Vasile Tibre7
1County Emergency Hospital, Cluj Napoca, Romania;2Department of
Endocrinology “Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cluj Napoca, Romania;3Diabet, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases Clinical
Center Cluj-Napoca, Cluj Napoca, Romania;4County Hospital, Turda,
Romania;5County Hospital, Bistrita, Romania;65th Department of Surgery,
“Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca,
Romania;7Departament of Neurology, “Iuliu Hatieganu” University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania.
Hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism leads to a large spectrum of clinical
manifestations but a rare and unusual presentation is onset or aggravation of
epilepsy.
We report a 77-year-old man who was found to have profound hypocalcaemia and
idiopatic hypoparathyroidism when investigated for epileptic seizures. He had
affective disturbances and only mild neurocognitive disorders. Cataract was
present. The neurological examination showed an extrapyramidal syndrome with
postural tremor and cerebellar ataxia. The deep tendon reflexes were normoactive
in all four limbs. Chvostek’s sign was present but Trousseau sign was not
observed. Laboratory analysis showed: low concentration of serum ionized
calcium at 2.9 mg/dl (normal: 4.2-5.4 mg/dl), total calcium at 5.9 mg/dl (normal:
8.8 to 10.0 mg/dl), hyperphosphoremia at 6.4 mg/dl (normal: 2.3 to 4.7 mg/dl)
and 2.5 pg/ml intact-parathyroid hormone (normal: 11.0 to 67.0 pg/ml). Alkaline
phosphatase, magnesium, calcitonin, serum thyroxin and thyroid-stimulating
hormone  levels  were  normal.  Brain  computed  tomography  demonstrated  a
symmetric,  extensive,  bilateral  calcification  of  the  basal  ganglia,  centrum
semiovale, and bilateral dentate nuclei of the cerebellum, typical for Fahr’s
syndrome. The red nucleus and substantia nigra appeared normal. The diagnosis
of Fahr’s syndrome, secondary to hypoparathyroidism was posed. A prepontine
meningioma was also found. The electrocardiogram showed normal QTc interval
and the interictal electroencephalography and electromyography were normal.
Bone densitometry was normal. After the patient was treated with oral calcium
and active vitamin D (1-alphahydroxy vitamin D3), serum calcium levels returned
to normal and seizure attacks ceased progressively  resulting in stopping
antiepileptic drugs. These cases illustrate the importance of search for disrupted
phosphocalcic metabolism but also emphasizes the importance of the role of
neuro-imaging in patients with new-onset epileptic seizures in order to detect
hypocalcemia secondary to hypoparathyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP148
EP149
Investigation of vitamin D deficiency in autoimmune endocrine disease
in terms of frequency and causal or consequential relationship
Aysen Akkurt Kocaeli1, Pinar Sisman2, Soner Cander3, Ozen Oz Gul2,
Canan Ersoy2 & Erdinc Erturk2
1Bursa State Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;
2Uludag University Medical School, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa,
Turkey;3Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Vitamin D Deficiency has been widely regarded as contributing to autoimmune
disease, but low levels of vitamin D in patients with autoimmune disease may be
a result rather than a cause like from malabsorbtion due to celiac disease,
gastrointestinal disorders related to diabetes or thyroid disease, corticosteroid
therapy complications etc...In this study, we aimed to investigate vitamin d levels
in autoimmune endocrine disorders and relationship with silent celiac disease.
Methods
A total of 135 subjects (103 patients with autoimmune endocrine disorders and 32
control subjects) were enrolled in the study. Tissue transglutaminase (tTG) antibody
levels were determined for the diagnosis of silent celiac disease. 25OHVitamin D
(VD) and PTH levels were measured. Patient divide autoimmun disorders and
control groups and subsequently compared with tTG antibodies positivity.
Results
Mean age was 37.8G12.0 years, 105 (77.7%) were female and 30 (22.3%) were
male in all subjects. Serum VD levels were significantly lower in the patients group
than healthy control group (17.2G7.2 and 25.4G7.1 ng/ml, P!0.001) and PTH
levels were higher (71.2G36.4 and 57.5G22.4 pg/ml, PZ0.083). Impairment of
VD and rise in PTH levels were more pronounced in patients with Addison’s
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
disease relative to the other endocrinopathies (13.7G7.2 ng/ml, 106.7G40 pg/ml).
Serum VD levels were statistically significantly lower in the patients with positive
tTG ab compared to negative ones and control groups and lower in the patients
with negative tTG ab compared to control subjects [tTGIgA pozitive (n:13)Z
13.3G7.8, tTGIgA negative (n:90)Z17.8G6.9, control (n:32)Z25.4G7.1 ng/ml].
Conclusion
VD  levels  were  found  significantly  lower  in  patients  with  autoimmune
endocrinopathies than control subjects, patients with Addison’s disease compared
to other endocrinopathies and tTG antibody positive, than negative ones. In
Addison’s disease, chronic glucocorticoid therapy may be an additive factor for this
reason. These results suggesting that vitamin d deficiency is both causal and
consequential factors in autoimmune endocrine disorders.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP149
EP150
Vitamin D status in a HIV-infected cohort from south of Spain:
descriptive analysis
Carolina García-Figueras Mateos, Manuel Cayón Blanco,
Patricia Bancalero Herrera & Alberto Terrón Pernía
Hospital SAS Jerez de la Frontera, Jerez de la Frontera, Andalusia, Spain.
Introduction
Vitamin D deficiency is common among people living with HIV worldwide.
There is a lack of studies focusing on prevalence and consequences of low levels
of vitamin D in our health care area (south of Spain). The main aim of this study is
to know the status of vitamin D and its consequences on parameters related to
calcium metabolism in a cohort of patients with HIV infection in our area.
Methods/Design
Cross-sectional study  encompassing HIV-infected outpatients treated  in our
hospital. Epidemiological variables and data related to vitamin D and calcium-
phosphorus metabolism (i-PTH, serum calcium and phosphorus) were recorded.
Vitamin D insufficiency (VDI) was defined as 25 OH-D levels !30 ng/ml and
vitamin D deficiency (VDD) was defined as values of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin
D below 20 ng/ml. Secondary hyperparathyroidism related to low levels of
vitamin D was defined as i-PTH levels higher than 65 pg/ml.
Results
HIV patients were included (mean age: 46G6.9 years; 87.2% males). Median
vitamin D level was 30.9G13.8 ng/ml. Normal levels of vitamin D were observed
in 46.8% of the cohort, VDI was present in 34.9% and VDD in 18.3%. We found
no differences in prevalence of VDI and VDD related to gender or presence of
HCV co-infection. According to status of vitamin D (normal, VDI and VDD),
significant  differences  in  laboratory  variables  related  to  calcium-phosporus
metabolism were not observed except in serum phosphorus levels (PZ0.04).
Secondary hyperparathyroidism linked to low levels of vitamin D was found in
the 20.4% of the cohort.
Conclusions
Prevalence of hypovitaminosis D in our HIV-infected patients from south of Spain is
very common. However, in our cohort, we found that its repercussions on calcium-
phosphorus homeostasis are weak. Nevertheless, further studies are ongoing in our
HIV-infected population to expand the knowledge on their clinical implications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP150
EP151
Metabolic changes in vitamin D deficiency
Ludmila Rozhinskaya1, Alexandra Petrushkina1,2, Ekaterina Pigarova1,
Tatyana Tarasova1 & Alexander Ilyin1
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia,2Moscow State
University, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
The improvement of vitamin D status is necessary to overcome an impaired
calcium-phosphorus metabolism and disturbances in other tissues functioning;
safety of medical intervention should include analysis of metabolic changes.
Material and methods
Twenty four apparently healthy volunteers 24.9G2 year were included in the study:
Group 1 (11/24) with blood serum levels of 25(OH)D !10 ng/ml and Group 2
(13/24) with 25(OH)D levels 10-20 ng/ml. Assessments were made at baseline; 3 h;
3, 7 and 28 days after intake of 200 000 IU of cholecalciferol oil solution.
Results
At baseline we observed significantly higher mean level of PTH (63.0G17.2 vs
35.3G10.2; P!0.01) with elevation above the upper level of normal range (ULN)
in 36.4% in Group 1 whereas in Group 2 levels met normal range in all individuals.
Urine calcium/creatinine ratio (CCR), mmol/mmol MGS.D.(Min-Max): Group 1 -
0.25G0.13(0.12-0.58), Group 2 - 0.31G0.21(0.03-0.71); values were less than
lower level of normal range (0,1) in 15.4% in Group 2. Blood serum Catot, Caion
levels, Caion fraction and P levels were not different between the groups and were
within the normal range.
By 28th day 41.6 and 87.5% from all participants achieved 25(OH)D blood serum
level O30 ng/ml and O20 ng/ml respectively. By 3d day we observed significant
decrease of PTH level in Group 1 (by 27%, P!0.05). There was no significant
changes in CCR during follow-up period, but in one individual we observed an
increase higher than ULN (maxCCRZ0.89) which was transient. We also observed
one case of hypercalcemia (maxCatotZ2.65 mmol/l) which wasn’t associated with
increase in Caion.
Conclusion
High-dose oral cholecalciferol treatment for vitamin D deficiency is efficient and
safe in young patients regardless of severity of vitamin D deficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP151
EP152
Calcium as a marker of metabolic decompensation in glycogen storage
disease type-1a
Suleyman Nahit Sendur, Ugur Unluturk & Selcuk Dagdelen
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hacettepe University
School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Glycogen storage disease type 1a (GSD1a) is an inborn error of metabolism with
several metabolic decompensations including anaerobic glycolysis and lactic
acidosis but few known about GSD1a-related hypercalcemia. Here we aimed to
present a putative relationship between serum Ca and the affected metabolic
parameters during metabolic decompensation of GSD1a.
Case report
Two patients with GSD1a and hypercalcemia were retrospectively analyzed.
Fasting plasma glucose, serum calcium (Ca), triglyceride (TG), lactate and HCO3
levels were documented as the markers for metabolic control. Corrected/ionized
Ca ratio was used as an indirect marker of serum unbound calcium fraction other
than ionized calcium.
Case 1 is a 19-year-old male, diagnosed of GSD1a at the age of eight. Case 2 is
32-year-old female, diagnosed as GSD1a at the age of three. Ionized-Ca levels
were normal in both patients despite high levels of the corrected serum Ca and
low PTH levels. When the levels of corrected serum Ca matched with fasting
plasma glucose, serum TG, lactate and HCO3 levels, a positive correlation
between serum Ca and TG levels was observed.
Conclusion
Hypercalcemia in GSD1a might be simply related to an erroneous measurement
due to high triglyceride levels. However, it cannot explain PTH-supression. The
Corrected/ionized Ca ratio was negatively correlated with PTH levels. During the
course of chronic lactic acidosis, bone works as a buffer-tissue by mobilizing
CaCO3. Therefore slightly high calcium levels suppressing PTH may be related
to release of calcium from the bone tissue. Consequently mild hypercalcemia
itself may be a sign of metabolic decompensation like high triglyceride levels in
patients with GSD1a.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP152
EP153
Vitamin D3 deficiency and secondary hyperparathyroidism
development in patients with different stages of chronic kidney disease
Natalia Karlovich
City Endocrinological Dispensary, Minsk, Belarus.
The aim was to estimate Vitamin D3 (25OHD) level and it’s relation to secondary
hyperparathyroidism (SHPT) development in patients with different stages of
chronic kidney disease (CKD).
We examined 114 patients, 71 f, 43 m; age 44.6G14.3 years. CKD stage was
defined by estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) calculated by MDRD
formula. 48 patients have CKD stage 1-2, 26 pts - CKD3, 27 pts - CKD4, 13 pts
- CKD5 (not on dialysis). Serum PTH, 25OHD, calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P)
were measured. All patients did not receive vitamin D and/or calcium supplements.
Mean PTH level was 120.7G113.4 pg/ml (95%CI 96.0-145.5). Frequency of SHPT
was 44.7% in whole group, 12.5% in patients with CKD 1-2 stages, 23.1% - in
CKD3, 96.3% - in CKD4, 100% - in CKD5. In patients with eGFR !45 ml/min
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
elevated PTH level was in 95.6% of cases vs 11.6% of those with eGFR R45 ml/min
(P!0.00001).
Mean 25OHD level was 18.6G8.4 pg/ml (95%CI 17.0-20.1). Only in 7.9% of whole
group 25OHD was 30 ng/ml and above (recommended level), in 55.3% - !20 ng/ml
(vitamin D deficiency). 25OHD level significantly correlated with eGFR (rZ0.47),
PTH (rZK0.39), age (rZK0.23), Ca (rZ0.27) and P (K0.20) levels. Frequency of
25OHD deficiency in patients with eGFRR45 ml/min was 40.6, and 77.8% in those
with eGFR!45 ml/min (PZ0.0002). In subgroup of patients with decreased
25OHD level PTH and P were significantly higher (156.9G147.7 vs 75.8G
77.2 pg/ml; 1.33G0.38 vs 1.17G0.22 mmol/l, P!0.001), Ca was lower (2.31G
0.30 vs 2.43G0.18 mmol/l, PZ0.0002).
We can assume that vitamin D3 deficiency is very common in patients with advanced
CKD stages and associated with higher PTH level and more profound mineral
disturbances. Screening of both PTH and 25OHD3 levels in patients with eGFR
!45 ml/min seems to be reasonable for choosing of best strategy of medical care.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP153
EP154
Abstract withdrawn.
EP155
Biochemical and hormonal alterations in women who underwent total
thyroidectomy
Kassiani Kakava1, Symeon Tournis2, Georgios Papadakis3,
Ioannis Karelas1, Pavlos Stampouloglou1, Evanthia Kassi4,
Ioannis Triantafillopoulos2, Theodoros Karatzas5, Vassiliki Villiotou6,
Nikolaos Dogkas6, Pavlos Sarov1, Georgios Tassopoulos1 &
Nikolaos Petridis1
1Head and Neck Surgery Department, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus,
Athens, Greece;2Laboratory of Research of Musculoskeletal System of the
School of Medicine, University of Athens, Athens, Greece;3Department of
Endocrinology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus, Athens, Greece;
4Endocrinology Unit, Laikon General Hospital, Athens, Greece;52nd
Propedeutic Surgical Department, Laikon General Hospital, Athens,
Greece;6Department of Biochemistry, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital,
Pireaus, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Postsurgical hypoparathyroidism, (postHypoP), is a common complication of
total thyroidectomy. We studied the variation of biochemical and hormonal
parameters in patients who underwent total thyroidectomy.
Design
The study included 106 females of a mean age (GS.D.) 51.03 (G13.42) years who
underwent total thyroidectomy for multinodular goiter. We estimated the value of
25(OH)vitD,  PTH,  CT,  adjusted  Ca,  P,  and  alkaline  phosphatase
(Alp),
preoperatively and in the 1st and 7th postoperative day.
Results
The patients were devided in groups, A and B, based on the presence of postHypoP. A
total of 67 patients experienced postHypoP and were included in group A and 39
without postHypoP in group B. Patients in group A were younger than patients in
group B (49.6G14.1 vs 53.3G11 years, PZ0.031). The presence of parathyroid
tissue in biopsy was significantly related to postHypoP, as observed in 38.1% in
group A vs 14.7% in group B (PZ0.016). In contrast, malignancy or thyroiditis in
histology were not significantly related to postHypoP.
When comparing laboratory values of groups A and B there was no statistically
significant difference in preoperative values of Ca, PTH and 25 (OH) vitD between
the two groups (PO0.05). The 1st postoperative day Group A had lower mean
adjusted Ca levels (Ca: 8.29G0.43 vs 9.34G0.41 mg/dl, PZ0.023). From the ROC
curve, the best cut-off point of PTH in the 1st postoperative day that differentiated
patients who developed postHypoP from those who did not was 13.45 pg/ml with
sensitivity of 77% and specificity of 54%.(Area under the curve (AUC) Z0.71, 95%
CIZ0.61-0.81, P!0.001).
Conclusion
In patients after total thyroidectomy a PTH value %13.4 pg/ml the 1st postoperative
day and the presence of parathyroid tissue in biopsy are positive related to postHypoP.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP155
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP156
Association of serum calcium concentrations with fibrinogen and
homocysteine in non-diabetic Korean subjects
Eun Sook Kim, Sung Dae Moon & Je Ho Han
Catholic university, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Objectives
Considerable evidence shows that increased serum calcium levels are associated
with metabolic disorders, cardiovascular disease and increased mortality. This
study investigated whether serum calcium, within a normal range, is significantly
associated  with  serum  fibrinogen  and  homocysteine,  markers  of  increased
cardiovascular disease risk in non-diabetic Korean subjects.
Methods
A cross-sectional analysis was performed on 1096 subjects (mean age, 55.1G
11.1
years;
36.1%  women)  undergoing  a  general  health  checkup.  Serum
biochemistry was analyzed including serum albumin-corrected calcium (Cac),
insulin  resistance
(IR,  using  homeostasis  model  assessment
[HOMA]),
fibrinogen, and homocysteine.
Results
Compared with patients within the lowest Cac  quartile, those with higher Cac
levels had increased fibrinogen and homocysteine levels as well as an increased
proportion of smoking and dyslipidemia, and HOMA-IR. Correlation analyses
revealed linear relationships for Cac with fibrinogen and homocysteine in both
genders. After adjustment for confounding factors, serum Cac was significantly
associated with high fibrinogen (odds ratio [OR] for the highest vs the lowest
quartileZ1.76,
95%  confidence  interval
[CI]Z1.10-2.83,  PZ0.020)  and
homocysteine
(ORZ1.82,
95%  CIZ1.22-3.71,  PZ0.008).  Multivariate
regression models showed that Cac  was linearly associated with fibrinogen
(standardized  bZ0.14,  P!0.001)  and  homocysteine  (standardized  bZ0.07,
PZ0.009).
Conclusions
High  normal  calcium  concentrations  were  independently associated  with
increased levels of fibrinogen and homocysteine. Further investigation is needed
to validate whether slightly increased calcium levels within the normal range
indicate a higher risk of cardiovascular disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP156
EP157
Bone mineral density in postmenopausal women with high levels of
parathyroid hormone
Irfan Esen1, Selin Akturk Esen1, Soner Cander2, Ozen Oz Gul3 &
Erdinc Erturk3
1Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Internal Medicine,
Bursa, Turkey;2Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;3Uludag University
Medical School, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey.
One of the main problems encountered with increased levels of serum PTH is
decrease in bone mineral density in the long term. Secondary hyperparathyroid-
ism due to vitamin D deficiency leads to mineralization disorders of the bones,
low bone mineral density, osteoporosis and ultimately an increased risk of bone
fracture in adults. In this study, we aimed to determine the reasons of secondary
hyperparathyroidism for bone mineral density.
One hundred and thirteen postmenopausal women with high serum PTH levels
and 43 ones with normal PTH were enrolled to the study. Serum PTH level higher
than 68.3 pg/ml was considered as hyperparathyroidism. The measurements of
the lumbar spine and the left femur were recorded. The mineral density (g/cm2) of
the second lumbar (L) vertebra and the average mineral density of the L 1-4
vertebrae were compared statistically. Also the mineral density (g/cm2) of the left
femoral neck and the average mineral density of the femoral neck, trochanteric
and intertrochanteric regions were compared.
There were no significant differences between the groups in terms of menopausal
age and body mass index or in terms of serum calcium levels but serum
phosphorus levels were significantly lower in the study group. Serum 25-OH
vitamin D levels were low in both groups. There was no significant difference in
both regions (Femur and L1-4 vertebrae) in terms of bone mineral density.
However, when all cases were evaluated together, the average mineral density
of the L1-4 vertebrae showed a negative correlation with serum PTH levels
(rZK0.175; PZ0.029).
In our study, there is no significant difference between the study and control group
in terms of bone mineral density and it may be related to the duration of
hyperparathyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP157
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP158
Investigation of interference with binding proteins in two commonly
used 25-hydroxyvitamin D assays
Erzsebet Toldy1,2, Éva Virágh3, Dóra Eszter Horváth3, László Kovács3,
Eniko˝ Andrea Kovács1, Péter Lakatos4 & Zoltán Locsei3
1Institute of Diagnostics, Faculty of Health Science, University of Pécs,
Pécs, Hungary;2Central Laboratory Markusovszky University Teaching
Hospital, Szombathely, Hungary;3Department of General Internal Medicine
Markusovszky University Teaching Hospital, Szombathely, Hungary;
4Semmelweis University, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of I. Internal
Medicine, Budapest, Hungary.
Background
Adequate vitamin D supply is necessary for bone metabolism and also for
the general maintenance of health. 25OHD is transported primarily bound to
vitamin-D binding protein (DBP), but also to albumin. Lower concentration
of plasma proteins may cause difficulties in immunoanalytics. Our aim was
to investigate the protein dependence of the two most often used
25OHD
immuno- (CLIA) and protein binding- (ECLPBA) assays.
Methods
levels were measured by CLIA and ECLPBA. Exogenous albumin was added by
in vitro experiment at five dilution steps to serum pools from patients (NZ24)
with low albumin while DBP remained permanent. 109 clinical cases were
investigated too,
63 patient with subnormal albumin levels (with cirrhosis,
nephrosis, malabsorption syndrome, chronic renal failure), and 46 healthy control
with normal albumin levels.
Results
In the in vitro experiment the bias of 25OHD was markedly positive by increasing
concentrations of albumin in case of ECLPBA. By the CLIA the bias of 25OHD
was  mostly  slight  and  negative.  Patient’s  sera  with  low  albumin  showed
significantly lower 25OHD levels compared to specimens with higher albumin
levels  by both methods. Analyzing the  obtained  concentrations  of
25OHD
between two methods there was no difference in controls, but it was significant
in hospitalised patients. Among clinical subgroups, there were no significant
differences between the two methods except cirrhosis.
Conclusion
Our results suggest that CLIA method interact more with DBP and less with
albumin, than the ECLPBA. Both 25OHD methods depend somewhat on albumin
levels,  but  it  is  only  marginal  in  sera  with  normal  albumin  levels,  but
characteristic with lower albumin. Our results call attention to the fact that
each method showed a proportionate 25OHD vitamin level change in accordance
with the changing albumin levels and DBP/albumin ratio.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP158
EP159
Abstract withdrawn.
EP160
The relationship between serum vitamin D levels and metabolic
syndrome in obese children and adolescents
Seda Aydogan1, Asan Onder2 & Zehra Aycan2
1Division of Pediatrics, Dr Sami Ulus Obstetrics, Children Health and
Diseases Research and Training Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Dr Sami Ulus
Obstetrics, Children Health and Diseases Research and Training Hospital,
Pediatric Endocrinology Clinic, Ankara, Turkey.
Objective
Obesity and vitamin D deficiency are become most important public health
problems  independently.  We  aimed  to  investigate  the  relationship  between
vitamin  D  levels  and  metabolic  sydrome
(MetS)  in  obese  children  and
adolescents.
Patients and methods
51 obese children/adolescents at the age of 12.4G2.73 (7.0-18.0) years and 48
age-sex matched healthy controls were enrolled. Serum 25 OHD, 1,25 (OH)2 D,
calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, parathormone (PTH) were measured
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
in all participants. Vitamin D sufficiency, insufficiency and deficiency were
defined as serum 25 OHD concentrations O20 ng/ml, !20 ng/ml, !15 ng/ml,
respectively. IDF, NCEP ATP III and WHO criterias were used to describe MetS.
Results
2% severe deficiency,
35.3% deficiency,
23.5% insufficiency and
39.2%
sufficiency of vitamin D was found in the obese group. The serum concentration
of 25 OHD was 18.2G6.2 ng/ml, 1,25 (OH)2 D was 28.9G11.7 pg/dl in the obese
group, and 25.6G5.9 ng/ml, 25.5G9.3 pg/dl in control group, respectively. Obese
children demonstrated significantly decreased 25 OHD levels compared to control
group; however their 1,25 (OH)2 D and parathormone levels were similar. Cut-off
level for 25 OHD which lead to increased PTH was found 15.8 ng/ml (specificity
53.5%, sensitivity 72.5%) by ROC analysis. Also, at the cut-off level of 13.6 ng/ml
for 25 OHD, specificity increased to 72.5% and sensitivity increased to 81%. There
was no association between serum 25 OHD, 1,25 (OH)2 D and MetS.
Conclusions
Obese children demonstrated significantly decreased 25 OHD levels, while their
1,25 (OH)2 D and PTH concentrations were similar with healthy controls.
Therefore, we speculated that it was not suitable to detect serum 25 OHD - as it is
stored in adipose tissue- in obese children. New methodologies for detecting
25 OHD levels and new detailed studies to determine a new cut- off level for
vitamin D deficiency in obese children are needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP160
EP161
Evaluation the relationship between subclinical hypothyroidism and
vitamin D level
Nergis Gungormez1, Suleyman Ahbab1, Esra Ataoglu1, Betul
Cavusoglu Turker1, Evrim Cakir2 & Mustafa Yenigun1
1Internal Medicine Clinic, Haseki Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey;2Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Haseki Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background
Subclinical hypothyroidism is a thyroid disease which encountered in practice,
commonly. Thyroid hormones affect metabolic syndrome parameters including
HDL  cholesterol,  triglycerides,  plasma  glucose  levels,  blood  pressure  and
abdominal obesity. Furthermore; there have been growing evidences about the
relationship between vitamin D deficiency and autoimmune thyroid diseases.
Therefore;  we  aimed  to evaluate  the  association between  the  metabolic
parameters and 25-OH-vitamin D levels in subclinic hypothyroid patients.
Methods
This  study  consisted  of
110
patients
(62
subclinical  hypothyroid  and
48
euthyroid) who attend to Haseki Training and Research Hospital’s Internal
Medicine outpatient clinics between 2014 January and April. The groups were
similar interms of age (51.66G14.64 in subclinical hypothyroid; 47.42G15.57 in
euthyroid group; PZ0.14). Serum fT4, TSH, total cholesterol, trigliseride, LDL-C,
HDL-C, fasting glucose and 25(OH)- vitamin D levels were recorded. Height,
weight, waist circumference and blood pressure of all subjects were meaured.
Results
The 25-OH-vitamin D, fasting glucose, total cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL-C,
LDL-C and waist circumference levels were similar between euthyroid and
subclinical hypothyroid groups
(PO0.05). The 25-OH-vitamin D level was
20.93G16.5 in subclinical hypothyroid group and 21.88G19.15 in euthyroid
group.  The  increased  BMI  was  found  in  subclinical  hypothyroid  group
(PZ0.024).  Prevalence  of  metabolic  syndrome  was  significantly  higher  in
euthyroid group (43.5% in subclinical hypothyroid group, 25% in euthyroid
group; P: 0.044).
Conclusion
We found the lower vitamin D levels in subclinical hypothyroid group, however
the difference did not reach statistical significance. Additionally, the higher
metabolic syndrome prevalence is obtained in subclinic hypothyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP161
EP162
Correlation of serum vitamin D level with mortality in patients with
sepsis
Sukriti Kumar & Manish Gutch
King George’s Medical College, Lucknow, India.
Background
Sepsis is the leading cause of mortality in the critically ill. Recent studies
emphasize early classification and treatment is paramount to improving mortality
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
rates. Recently it has been found in many studies that many trace elements and
nutrients do have effect on human body and if supplemented can improve the
prognosis in patients with sepsis.
Aim and objectives: primary objective
Whether low vitamin D is associated with mortality.
Secondary objective
To find out association of low vitamin D levels and morbidity in terms of length of
hospital and ICU stay.
Material and methods
Following ethical approval, consent will be sought from either the patient, or
assent  from  a  near  relative.  Successive  patients  admitted  to  the  medical
emergency and Intensive Care Unit at tertiary care health centre who fulfil the
following criteria for sepsis, within a 24 h time window, were included.
Results
Amongst 88 patients evaluated in our study 15 patients (18.2%) were found to
have adequate vitamin D levels and seven patients (8%) were found insufficient
and rest 52 patients (73.9%) were found deficient in vitamin D. Age of the patients
ranged between 18 and 82 years with mean (GS.D.) 45.02G17.69 years. Mean
vitamin D level was found significantly higher among patients with positive
outcome than those with unfavourable outcome (Expiry) (tZ2.075, PZ0.04). On
comparison of length of hospital stay (morbidity) with vitamin D levels we found
statistically significant inverse relation between vitamin D levels and length of
hospital stay.
Conclusion
Vitamin D deficiency lead to increased risk of mortality in the critically ill along
with prolonged hospital stay.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP162
EP163
The relationship of Beck depression inventory with vitamin D levels and
visceral fat mass in cancer patients
Savas Tuna1, Meral Mert2, Ozlem Soyluk5, Yildiz Okuturlar3,
Didem Tastekin4 & Hakan Kocoglu3
1Department of Medical Oncology, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Educationa
and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology,
Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educationa and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey;3Department of Internal Medicine, Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk
Educationa and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;4Department of
Medical Oncology, Istanbul University Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul,
Turkey;5Department of Endocrinology, Istanbul University Faculty of
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
The aim of this study is to determine the relationship of Beck Depression
Inventory (BDI) with vitamin D levels and total and visceral fat mass in cancer
patients.
Methods
A total of 219 patients were included in the study. All patients underwent blood
tests including prealbumin, vitamin D. Also patients’ BMI values were calculated
and total and visceral fat masses of all patients were measured by bio-impedance
analyzer. All subjects completed a self-administered BDI questionnaire.
Results
A total of 219 patients consisted of 53.9% (nZ118) female and 46.1% (nZ101)
male patients with median age 52.41G13.66 (range, 19-84) years. Mean BMI
value was 24.70G3.75 kg/m2; mean BDI score was 13.02G8.72; and mean
prealbumin level was 0.21G0.07 g/l. BMI was negatively correlated with BDI
both in all study group (PZ0.002) and in male patients (PZ0.011) whereas there
was  no  correlation  in  female  patients  between  BMI  and  BDI
(PZ0.237).
Prealbumin levels, vitamin D levels and hemoglobin levels were negatively
correlated  with  BDI
(P!0.05  for  all).  But  no  significant  correlation  was
determined between total fat mass, visceral fat mass levels and BDI (PO0.05).
Depression status had a significant relationship with BMI, vitamin D levels,
prealbumin levels and malnutrition status in patients (PZ0.008, 0.001, 0.001, and
0.001, respectively).
Conclusions
We have determined a significant correlation between vitamin D levels and BDI
scores  which  indicate  depression  status  in  cancer  patients.  There  was  no
correlation between BDI and visceral fat mass. There was a negative correlation
between BDI score and BMI levels but this was not associated with total or
visceral fat mass in cancer patients. Thus vitamin D levels could be used to
determine the depression and nutritional statuses which might help to improve the
clinical outcomes in cancer patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP163
EP164
4D-CT parathyroid increases the likelihood of localising parathyroid
adenoma in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism and
indeterminate Tc99m-SestamibiCI-123 subtraction scan
Brian Lee1, Manish Pandit2 & Ansu Basu1
1Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology and Lipid Metabolism,
Birmingham City Hospital (SWBH), Birmingham, UK;2Department of
Physics and Nuclear Medicine, Birmingham City Hospital (SWBH),
Birmingham, UK.
Introduction
Tc99m-SestamibiCI-123 subtraction using planar and SPECT-CT is commonly
used  to  investigate  PHPT.  Our  centre  previously  published  sensitivity  and
specificity of 92 and 86% respectively for Tc99m-SestamibiCI-123 subtraction.
Five false-negative studies required neck exploratory surgery. One false-positive
study incorrectly localised a PA which was not found in surgery (nZ67). In
recent years 4D-CT parathyroid has emerged as a useful technique to detect and
localise PA in the work-up of patients with PHPT. We have been using 4D-CT as
a second line investigation following an indeterminate Tc99m-SestamibiCI-123
subtraction.
Description of methods/design
We retrospectively reviewed case records of patients with surgically proven PA
who had also 4D-CT post subtraction scan. A common cause of indeterminate
Tc99m-SestamibiCI-123 subtraction is the confounding factor of multi-nodular
goitre or nodules.
Demographic data (age, sex, pre and postoperative calcium/PTH) were presented
as descriptive statistics. Histopathology of surgical specimens was also examined.
Sensitivity and specificity of 4D-CT was calculated with surgically proven PA as
the reference standard.
Results
Eight patients had indeterminate Tc99m-SestamibiCI-123 subtraction for PHPT;
seven had positive 4D-CT parathyroid (six surgical specimens confirmed PA, one
normal parathyroid tissue). One had normal 4D-CT and histology confirmed
normal  parathyroid  tissue.  In  patients  with  surgically  proven  PA,
4D-CT
parathyroid performed pre-operatively demonstrated a sensitivity of 83% and a
positive predictive value of 83%.
Conclusion
In a cohort of patients with indeterminate subtraction scans for investigation of
PHPT, 4D-CT parathyroid significantly improved the diagnostic value for pre-
operative localisation. It is therefore the preferred second line investigation of
choice, with high sensitivity and predictive value allowing accurate pre-operative
localisation for minimally invasive parathyroidectomy. The patients can also be
better informed of the likelihood of finding of PA prior to surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP164
EP165
BMI but not visceral adiposity index is related to vitamin D levels in
overweight HIV-patients
Manuel Cayón Blanco, Carolina García-Figueras Mateos, Patricia
Bancalero Herrera & Alberto Terrón Pernía
Hospital SAS Jerez de la Frontrera, Jerez de la Frontera, Spain.
Introduction
Several studies have shown that BMI and visceral adiposity index (VAI) are
inversely related to serum 25-hydroxy vitamin D (25OHD) in general population.
There  is  a  lack  of  studies  performed  in  HIV  population,  whose  body  fat
distribution is altered by lipodystrophy or liver disease. We aimed to analyze the
cross-sectional associations of VAI and BMI with the 25OHD concentration and
parameters related to calcium-phosphorus metabolism in HIV-infected patients.
Methods/design
46 male patients with HIV-infection and BMI O25 kg/m2 were included. Sex-
specific for males VAI was calculated using a model of adipose distribution
(MOAD)  defined  as:
(waist  circumference/39.68C1.88*(BMI))*(Trigly-
cerides/1.03)*(1.31/HDL). VAI, BMI and 25OHD were divided into two groups
at the 75th, 50th, and 50th, percentiles respectively, according to previous studies.
Results
The mean age of the cohort was 43.5G12.6 years. Mean BMI, VAI and 25OHD
were  28.9G3.8 kg/m2,  5.7G3.9  (75th  percentile:
8.1)  and
30.1G10 ng/ml,
respectively. Levels of 25OHD were significantly lower among patients with
higher BMI (PZ0.034) but non- significant differences were observed between
groups of VAI (O75th percentile vs !75th percentile; PZ0.502). Though levels
of i-PTH and calcium were higher among patients with higher BMI, no significant
differences were observed (PO0.05 in all cases). Also, no significant differences
in calcium-phosphorus metabolism according to VAI percentile were found.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
According to our results, we cannot conclude that the inverse relationship
between 25OHD and VAI described in general population, can be observed in our
HIV  cohort  when  MOAD  formula  was  used.  Nevertheless,  the  inverse
relationship with BMI is present. Anyway, repercussions on calcium-phosphorus
metabolism were inappreciable.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP165
EP166
Hypoparathyroidism and difficult to control hypocalcemia
Fatima M Alkaabi1, Raya A Almazrouei1, Khaled M Aldahmani1 &
Heba El Gayar2
1Tawam Hospital, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates;2Imperial College
Diabetic Center, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
Introduction
Autoimmune  polyglandular  syndrome  type
1
(APS-1)  is  a  rare  autosomal
recessive  disorder  characterized  by  autoimmune  multiorgan attack. Clinical
manifestations are widely variable. Treatment is based on supplementation of the
various deficiencies and the prognosis is variable.
Case
An 18-year-old female presented with nail dystrophy and candida infection at
age 7. Then, she was diagnosed with primary hyporparathyroidism and Addison’s
disease at age 9 and 10 subsequently. At age 12, APS was diagnosed. Two years
later, primary ovarian insufficiency was diagnosed. The main challenge in her
management was maintaining normocalcemia with avoidance of hypercalciuria
and nephrocalcinosis. She had several admissions with symptomatic hypocalce-
mia, (adjusted calcium as low as 1.6 mmol/l) and required intravenous calcium
infusions. Despite a high dose of oral calcium (1200 mg three times aday) and
vitamin D analogue, normocalcamia was rarely achieved. Therefore, she was
started  on  recombinant  human  PTH
(rPTH).  Fluctuations  of  calcemia
unfortunately did not improve, she remained having hypercalacemia (3 mmol/l)
as well as severe hypocalcemia (1.64 mmol/l).
In the hope of improving her quality of life, rPTH was delivered by a pump with a
rate of 0.3 units/h. Initially she did very well and achieved near normal calcium
(1.9-2.2 mmol/l), but recently presented with abdominal pain and vomiting and
was found to have adjusted calcium level of 3.03 mmol/l. During admission,
calcium fluctuated between 2.4 and 3 mmol/l. It later transpired that the patient
was giving herself boluses of PTH to avoid symptoms of hypocalcaemia. After
her mother took charge of pump device, calcium normalised at 2.38 mmol/l and
she was discharged on rPTH rate 0.25 unit/h with calcium 600 mg twice daily and
cholecalciferol 1000 units daily.
Conclusion
Management of hypoparathyroidism remains difficult despite of PTH pump.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP166
EP167
Adult iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism therapy: between less and more
Adina Terec2,3, Andra Morar2,3, Mara Carsote2,3, Dan Dumitru Pop3,4,
Carmen Emanuela Georgescu1,2,3 & Ana Valea1,2,3
1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;2Clinical County Hospital Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;
3Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy and C.I. Parhon
National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;4Department of
Radiotherapy, Prof. Dr Ion Chiricuta Oncology Institute Cluj-Napoca,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction
The hypoparathyroidism (HypoPT) represents a rare condition characterized by
low calcium (Ca) and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels, frequently due to
thyroid surgery by direct trauma of the parathyroid glands, devascularization, or
their accidental removal. Postoperative hypoparathyroidism-related hypocalce-
mia may be permanent or transient.
Case report
We report the case of a 64-year-old man presenting with severe symptoms of
hypocalcemia (muscle cramps, tingling, burning in the fingertips, toes, and lips,
muscle  spasms,  especially  around  the  mouth,  fatigue),
2 weeks  after  total
thyroidectomy  for  nodular  goiter,  despite  undergoing  treatment  with  daily
1800 mg calcium and 1200 IU vitamin D3  (cholecalciferol). Laboratory tests
showed low ionized serum calcium (1 mmol/l; N: 1.06-1.2 mmol/l), low albumin
adjusted total calcium (6.9 mg/day; N: 8.8-10.2 mg/day), low PTH (7.5 pg/ml;
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
N: 15-65 pg/ml). The histopathological exam confirmed the removal of one
parathyroid gland. HipoPT was confirmed and vitamin D/calcium supplements
were adjusted: active vitamin D analogues (Alfacalcidol 2 mg/day), calcium
supplements (3000 mg/day) and cholecalciferol (2000 IU/day). 5 months later,
the patient reported a clinical improvement despite persistent low serum and 24-h
urinary calcium levels (as well as PTH). Depression, possibly due to chronic
hypocalcemia, was diagnosed and psychiatric treatment was initiated. In addition,
abdominal ultrasound found renal sludge, which warranted careful monitoring
during  treatment  with  calcium  supplement  and  adequate  liquids  intake
recommendations.  Follow-up  during  therapy  is  necessary
(Alfacalcidol
1 mg/day  given  its  potent inhibitory effect  on PTH  levels),  calcium intake
3500 mg/day, together with cholecalciferol 1200 IU/day).
Conclusion
Treatment of HypoPT might be challenging due to doses of calcium in high doses
of vitamin D and calcium to obtain clinical and biochemical control while
avoiding the negative effects of calcium excess deposits. In this context, patient’s
well-being and quality of life may also be difficult goals to achieve.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP167
EP168
Vitamin D deficiency is highly prevalent in obesity and is related with
BMI and inflammation
Jose Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1,2, Fernando Cardona-Diaz2,
Carmen Maria Cortes-Salazar3, Maite Asenjo-Plaza4, María Concepción
García Ruiz4, Enrique Varea-Marineto4, María José Banderas-Donaire4,
Juan Alcaide-Torres2, Maria Isabel Queipo-Ortun˜o2, Isabel Moreno-Indias2,
Mercedes Clemente-Postigo2, Daniel Castellano-Castillo2 &
Francisco Tinahones1,2
1Endocrinology Department, Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital,
Malaga, Spain;2Biomedical Research Laboratory, Endocrinology
Department, IBIMA, Malaga, Spain;3Badolatosa Primary Care Centre,
Seville, Spain;4Cruz de Humilladero Primary Care Centre, Malaga, Spain.
& Barbara Zubelewicz-Szkodzinska1
Objectives
To study vitamin D deficiency in a cohort of obese males and to evaluate
associated clinical and biochemical characteristics.
Methods
Case-control study which included obese (defined by a BMI R30 kg/m2) males.
Vitamin D deficiency was defined as vitamin D levels !20 ng/ml. Estimation of
vitamin D status was determined in serum using a commercially available
enzyme- immuno-assay designed to measure 25-OH Vitamin D concentrations in
serum or plasma (Immundiagnostik, Quantikine, Bensheim, Germany).
Results
225 obese males were included in the study. Prevalence of vitamin D deficiency
was 51.3%; mean vitamin D levels was 13.8 ng/ml in the group with vitamin D
deficiency and 27.3 ng/ml in normal vitamin D status group (P!0.001 for
comparison). No differences in age (36.0 vs 37.7, PZ0.1), insulin resistance
(measured by HOMA-IR index) (5.2 vs 4.3, PZ0.11), calcium levels (9.06 vs
9.0 mg/dl), PTH levels (46.1 vs 44 pg/ml, PZ0.35) or HbA1c (5.4 vs 5.4, PZ0.6)
was found between patients with or without vitamin D deficiency, respectively.
Patients with vitamin D deficiency were more obese (BMI 40 vs 37.4, PZ0.04)
and had higher levels of PCR (7.5 vs 5.3 mg/l, PZ0.01).
Conclusions
Vitamin D deficiency affects to w50% of obese males. These patients tend to be
more obese and have higher PCR levels than patients with normal concentrations
of vitamin D.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP168
EP169
25-hydroxy vitamin D levels in patients with newly diagnosed of cancer
Diana Boj-Carceller, Mónica Llorente-Barrio, Leticia Pérez-Fernandez,
Isabel Azcona-Monreal, Beatriz Lardies-Sanchez & Alejandro Sanz-Paris
Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain.
Introduction
Recent studies have pointed out a possible role of vitamin D in carcinogenesis.
Vitamin D deficiency may be related to a major cancer incidence and mortality.
This association would be more relevant for breast and colorectal cancer. Obesity
acts as a risk factor for these type of neoplasms on which vitamin D could
influence.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Subjects and methods
A cross-sectional study of consecutive out-patients with newly diagnosed cancer:
urological, colorectal (CRC), head and neck and ‘others’. Patients were referred
to the Nutrition Unit for preoperative nutritional evaluation (fast-track protocol)
during the year 2014. We assessed body composition by bioelectrical impedance
analysis and determined serum 25-hydroxy vitamin D,25(OH)D, levels.
Results
A total of 93 patients were evaluated: 39 had urological cancer, 25 colorectal
cancer (CRC), 25 head and neck cancer and four other type.
The mean concentration of 25(OH)D was 53.8G32.3 nmol/l (95% CIZ45.0-63.7).
59.6%  showed vitamin  D  deficiency  (!50 nmol/l)  and  19.1%  insufficiency
(50-75 nmol/l).
There were differences in vitamin D deficiency depending on the type of cancer:
head and neck 70.8%, CCR 64.0% and urological 47.0% (P!0.008).
No statistically significant associations were found between 25(OH)D levels and
sex, age, smoking, BMI and fat mass. The season of blood collection significantly
modified 25(OH)D concentration (P!0,030).
Conclusions
We have found a high prevalence of vitamin D deficiency among patients with a
new diagnosis of cancer, specially for those with head and neck cancer. The use of
laboratory reference values adjusted by season could avoid possible bias. The
interesting link between vitamin D and cancer deserves more research.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP169
EP170
Correlations among calf circumference index, selected anthropometric
and biochemical parameters among patients over 60 years
Justyna Nowak1, Karolina Kulik-Kupka1, Anna Bronczyk-Puzon1,
Aneta Koszowska1, Pawel Jagielski2, Ilona Korzonek-Szlacheta1
1
Department of Nutrition Related Prevention; School of Public Health in
Bytom, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Bytom, Silesia, Poland;
2Human Nutrition Department, Faculty of Health Science, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Caracow, Poland.
Introduction
Anthropometric parameters are easy and quickly methods of assess risks of many
diseases.
Aim
The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  assess  the  correlation  between  calf
circumference  index,  selected  anthropometric
(such  as  BMI,  BAI,  WHR,
WHtR index) and biochemical parameters (such as concentration of 25(OH)D3,
lipid profile, fasting glucose) among patients over 60 years.
Materials and methods
Cross-sectional study was done in a group of 123 patients hospitalized in the
geriatric department in 2013-2015 (66% of the group were women, nZ81).
The study included patients above 60 years, without oral supplementation of
vitamin D3 3 months before hospitalizations, without chronic kidney and liver
diseases. Anthropometric parameters were measured in the morning, in light
clothes in accordance with generally accepted methodology. Results of bio-
chemical parameters were red from the patients’ medical records. The obtained
data were statistically analyzed using STATISTICA 10PL. aZ0.05.
Results
Mean age was 75.66G7.47 years. The average value of calf circumference index
was 34.58G4.25 cm. The average BMI was 27.44G5.04 kg/m2; WHR 0.95G
0.08; WHtR 0.61G0.08; BAI 33.38G6.06%. The mean concentration of 25(OH)
D3 was 15.35G6.65 ng/ml; fasting glucose 110.93G50.12 mg/dl; total cholesterol
204.32G51.21 mg/dl; HDL cholesterol 57.09G19.94 mg/dl; LDL cholesterol
125.82G42.85 mg/dl; triglycerides 115.87G57.05 mg/dl. There were observed
positive correlation between calf circumference index and 25(OH)D3 (RZ0.23;
PZ0.0266); triglycerides
(RZ0.30; PZ0.0007); BMI (RZ0.75; P!10K6);
WHR (RZ0.47; P!10K6); as well as BAI (RZ0.30; PZ0.0008). There were not
observed  statistically  significant  correlation  of  calf  circumference  index  in
relation to fasting glucose (RZ0.13; PZ0.1393); total cholesterol (RZ0.13;
PZ0.1558);  HDL  cholesterol
(RZK0.09;  PZ0.3264);  LDL  cholesterol
(RZ0.11; PZ0.2233).
Conclusions
The study indicates that the measurement of calf circumference is an easy and fast
methods  which  allow the assessment of  concentration
25(OH)D3 in group
patients above 60 years.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP170
EP171
The association between vitamin D deficiency and urinary tract
infection in postmenopausal women
Vesna Cosic1, Blazenka Miskic2,3 & Karla Miskic4
1Policlinic Cosic, Slavonski Brod, Croatia;2Medical Faculty Osijek,
University of Josip Juraj Strossmajer Osijek, Slavonski Brod, Osijek,
Croatia;3Endocrinology Department of General Hospital Dr J.Bencevic,
Slavonski Brod, Osijek, Croatia;4Medical Faculty Rijeka, Study of Dental
Medicine Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
Aim
We aimed to examine whether there is any association between serum levels of
25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D3] and silent urinary tract infection (UTI) among
postmenopausal women.
Methods
Age, postmenopausal period, BMI, white blood cell count, serum C-reactive
protein, calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, parathormone, serum 25(OH)
D3 levels and native urin speicemens were measured in 124 postmenopausal
women without signs of UTI, on regular gynecological checking.
Results
A total of 124 women average age of 53.4, with period of 3.5 year after last
menstruation were included, 66 had UTI and they were symptom free, other 58
had normal urine. The mean serum levels of 25(OH)D3 among woman with UTI
were significantly lower than those of controls (26.7G3.1 vs 36.59G4.2 nmol/l;
P!0.001). The serum levels of 25(OH)D3 were significantly lower in patients
with  UTI  compared  to  patients  without
(21.4G2.6
vs
31.9G2.9 nmol/l;
P!0.001). Within the study group, mean serum levels of 25(OH)D3 among
women with greater BMI O30.0 kg/m2 were lower than those of under it (21.8G
3.7 nmol/l vs 32.7G4.8 nmol/l; P!0.001). Multivariate analysis showed that the
BMI did not correlate with UTI.
Conclusions
Our results suggest that vitamin D deficiency may be a risk factor for UTI in
postmenopausal women.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP171
EP172
Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass reversal due to recalcitrant hypocalcaemia
after total thyroidectomy
Jo
˜o Silva, Catarina Ivo, Helder Simo˜es, Luis Lopes, Dolores Passos,
Mafalda Marcelino & Joa˜o Jácome de Castro
Portuguese Armed Forces University Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
Hypocalcaemia is a potential post-thyroidectomy complication. Patients with
previous  Roux-en-Y  Gastric  Bypass
(RYGBP)  are  at  increased  risk  of
symptomatic hypocalcaemia refractory to treatment. This complication is rare
and there is not consensus on how to act.
Clinic case
Female with 34 years old, with a history of Obesity (BMI 45.7 kg/m2), submitted
to RYGBP in 2013, with a total loss of 47 kg (current BMI 27.3 kg/m2). In
October 2014, she had total thyroidectomy for nodular hyperplasia. Postoperative
was complicated with symptomatic hypocalcaemia requiring calcium gluconate
i.v. and early replacement therapy with calcium and vitamin D as an outpatient.
Over the next 6 months she had five admissions in the Emergency Department due
to hypocalcaemia, requiring calcium gluconate i.v. administration. For this reason
was referred to our clinic in March 2015. After discussing the case with surgeons,
due to difficulties in normalizing calcium levels (calcium of 7.1 mg/dl with
calcium  carbonate
31 500 mg/day  and  calcitriol
1.5 mg/day  and  calcium
gluconate i.v. 3/3 weeks) decides to reverse the RYGBP in May 2015, which
occurred without complications. There was only a partial improvement of the
hypocalcaemia. In January 2016, she has calcium of 7.4 mg/dl with calcium
carbonate 9000 mg/day, cholecalciferol 2400 UI/day. Phosphorus was 4.6 mg/dl
(2.7-4.5) and PTH 4 pg/ml (16-87).
Conclusions
This case shows that patients with hypoparathyroidism and RYGBP have a high
risk of recalcitrant hypocalcaemia. For this reason, several authors have argued
that performing thyroidectomy after RYBGP should be done after analysing
benefits and risks. There are cases described in the literature that after medical
treatment failure, the reversal of RYBG can be a solution, as it restores the
absorption of calcium and vitamin D places, however we need randomized
controlled studies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP172
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP173
Evaluation of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in patients with
asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism
Emre Arslan, Alev Eroglu Altinova, Banu Aktas Yilmaz, Mujde Akturk,
Ilhan Yetkin, Metin Arslan & Fusun Toruner
Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Diseases Department, Ankara, Turkey.
Background
There is some evidence suggesting an interaction between renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone  system and parathyroid hormone
(PTH). Decreased  aldosterone
levels after parathyroidectomy have been reported in patients with primary
hyperparathyroidism (PHPT). Recently, most of the diagnosed patients with
PHPT are mild or asymptomatic. Our aim was to investigate plasma aldosterone
and renin concentrations in patients with asymptomatic PHPT.
Methods
Thirty-two patients with asymptomatic PHPT and 22 healthy control subjects
were recruited for this study. The levels of renin, aldosterone, PTH, calcium,
phosphorus and 25-OH vitamin D were investigated.
Results
Median PTH and calcium levels were significantly higher in the patients with
asymptomatic PHPT than the control group (155.0 (77.60) pg/ml vs 54.0 (13.20)
pg/ml and 10.80 (0.45) vs 9.48 (0.56) mg/dl, P!0.05, respectively)). Median
creatinine clearance levels were similar
(100 ml/min (22.80) vs 102 ml/min
(19.73), PO0.05, respectively). There was no statistically significant difference
between plasma renin levels and plasma aldosterone concentrations (5.98 (7.35)
vs 5.02 (12.87) and 95.14 (88.77) vs 105.92 (55.17), PO0.05, respectively).
There were no correlations between calcium and PTH levels and renin or
aldosterone levels (PO0.05).
Conclusion
Our  results  suggest  no  major  alterations  occur  in  the  renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system in patients with asymptomatic PHPT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP173
EP174
Vitamin D status among women living in a sunny region: Marrakesh
study
Salwa Baki1, Imane Harkati2, Abdelali Tali2, Ghizlane El Mghari2,
Leila chabaa2 & Nawal El Ansari1
1Endocrinology and Diabetes Department, University Hospital Mohamed
VI, Marrakesh, Morocco;2Biochemistry Department, University Hospital
Mohamed VI, Marrakesh, Morocco.
Background
Hypovitaminosis D is associated with poor dietary intake and inadequate sunshine
exposure. It is common worldwide. However, recent studies has shown a high
prevalence of hypovitaminosis D in Moroccan population.
Objective
We undertook this study to determine the specific prevalence of hypovitaminosis
and its relationship to metabolic parameters in pre-menopausal women living in a
sunny region.
Methods
The group studied included 105 patients aged from 18 to 45 years. Between
March  and  July,  we  assessed  socio-demographic  parameters,  metabolic
parameters and associated pathologies as well as risk factors for hypovitaminosis.
25 OH Vitamin D, serum calcium, phosphorus and lipid panels were measured.
Hypovitaminosis was defined for the values below 75 nmol/l.
Results
All the patients has hypovitaminosis with a mean value of 10.20G8.3 nmol/l.
78.1% had a vitamin D value under 25 nmol/l while 21.9% had insufficiency.
Calcium ad phosphorus were normal. The hypovitaminosis severity was not
correlated to the metabolic parameters (BMI, lipids, FG, HbA1c).
Conclusion
Our results show that hypovitaminosis is common among young Moroccan
women even if they are living in a sunny region. In the absence of precise
information regarding the vitamin D intake and the time spent outdoors, this
should emphasize the need for evaluation of vitamin D status in every women.
Prevention  strategies  should  be  initiated  by  governments  regarding  the
enhancement of vitamin D intake.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP174
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP175
Severe hungry bone syndrome after incidental parathyroidectomy in
hypophosphatemic rickets
Luís Cardoso1, Isabel Paiva1, Dírcea Rodrigues1,2, Daniela Guelho1,2,
Nuno Vicente1, Margarida Balsa3, Diana Martins1, Diana Oliveira1,
Adriana Lages1, Mara Ventura1 & Francisco Carrilho1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism,
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;2Faculty
of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;3Department of
Endocrinology, Centro Hospitalar do Baixo Vouga, Aveiro, Portugal.
Introduction
Hypophostemic rickets is characterized by phosphate renal loss associated with a
primary  defect of  osteoblasts  and metabolism  of vitamin D.  Marked bone
turnover caused by high levels of parathyroid hormone attribute to these patients
an elevated risk for hungry bone syndrome after parathyroidectomy.
Case report
A 34-years old woman with a past history of Lynch syndrome and hypophostemic
rickets  associated  with  hyperparathyroidism  and  brown  tumours.  She  had
multinodular goitre and 10 years ago she underwent left hemithyroidectomy,
isthmectomy,  and  subtotal  right  hemithyroidectomy,  without  immediate
complications, but hypothyroidism subsequently developed. Her current daily
medications are: 88 mcg of levothyroxine, 120 mg of cinacalcet, 4500 mg of
phosphorus and 1 mcg of calcitriol. Goitre relapsed and nodule cytological
assessment revealed a follicular tumour. Again, she underwent thyroid surgery
and two parathyroids were incidentally removed (one of them was histological
suggestive of parathyroid adenoma). She developed hypoparathyroidism and
severe hypocalcaemia after surgery. The lowest total calcemia identified was
5.5 mg/dl
(8.8-10.6),  magnesemia
1.1 mg/dl
(1.9-2.5),  and  phosphatemia
3.5 mg/dl (2.5-4.5). Urinary calcium and phosphate levels, under intravenous
calcium infusion, were
108 mg/24 h (!250) and 1032 mg/24 h (400-1300),
respectively. Even though she was being treated with intravenous and oral
calcium,  magnesium  and  calcitriol,  hypocalcaemia  remained  refractory.
Additionally, she developed frequent phlebitis and 20-60 mg of teriparatide
was added. Normocalcaemia was achieved after 4 months of intravenous calcium
gluconate
(total elemental calcium of
150 g), oral calcium carbonate
(total
elemental calcium of 1.5 kg).
Conclusion
Hungry bone syndrome, associated with hypophosphatemic rickets, is a rare
complication  of  parathyroidectomy,  particularly  in  the  setting  of  tertiary
hyperparathyroidism. The treatment of hungry bone syndrome should be directed
to the reestablishment of calcium deficit and restauration of bone turnover, which
may  take  several  months.  The  absence  of  guidelines  and  the  different
pharmacokinetics of calcium formulations pose a particular challenge in the
management of these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP175
EP176
Primary hyperparathyroidism detected in a patient undergoing two
prior thyroidectomies for follicular thyroid carcinoma: a case report
Gulsah Elbuken1, Zehra Gulciftci-Dagci2, Omer Ozcaglayan3, Ayse
Tuba Tonbul4, Neslihan Soysal Atile5 & Sayid Zuhur1
1Namik Kemal University Medical School, Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Tekirdag, Turkey;2Tekirdag Public Hospital, Department
of Pathology, Tekirdag, Turkey;3Namik Kemal University Medical School,
Department of Radiology, Tekirdag, Turkey;4Namik Kemal University
Medical School, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Tekirdag, Turkey;
5Tekirdag Public Hospital, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Tekirdag, Turkey.
Introduction
Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is usually characterized by overproduction
of parathormone (PTH) due to a solitary parathyroid adenoma. Its treatment
involves surgical removal of the solitary adenoma or hyperplastic parathyroid
glands that secrete PTH. Medical treatment options are used for patients with
conditions that preclude surgical operation.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Case presentation
A 57-year-old  female  patient  underwent  left  total  and  right  subtotal
thyroidectomy operations on 18/05/2009 for multinodular goiter. Pathological
examination  revealed  a
5.5 cm  follicular  carcinoma  in  the  left  lobe.  On
30.06.2009, she underwent completion thyroidectomy and subsequently received
ablative therapy with radioactive iodine (RAI) at a dose of 150 mCi. Elevated
calcium and reduced phosphorus levels were found during her follow-up visits.
While the findings of several tests were consistent with PHPT, only a slightly
echoic, well-circumscribed lesion (5!5!11 mm) located close to the former
place of the inferior pole of the right thyroid gland was detected by neck
ultrasound images and its vascularization was shown by Doppler ultrasound.
However, no increase in activity or uptake was observed during parathyroid
scintigraphy and neck CT did not show a mass formation.
Her serum calcitonin level was normal. The possibility of a thyroid medullary
carcinoma  was  excluded  by  reexamining  of  her  paraffin-embedded  thyroid
blocks. The patient who already had undergone two major surgeries and one
course of RAI treatment refused another neck operation. Thus, treatment with
Cinacalcet was initiated. Calcium values returned to normal after the treatment.
Conclusion
Follicular  carcinoma  in  the  presence  of  PHPT  is  a  rare  occurrence.  Non-
visualization of parathyroid tissue by imaging studies in a patient with two prior
thyroidectomy operations and RAI therapy makes our case quite an interesting
one. Cinacalcet therapy is a good therapeutic option to control calcium levels in
cases  where  excessive  secretion  of  PTH  cannot  be  achieved  by  surgical
intervention.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP176
EP177
Calcium and vitamin D metabolism among patients with excess of
weight of a docent clinic in Salvador-Ba
Maria de Lourdes Souza E Silva1, Jamille Rodrigues1,2 & Minna Carvalho1
1Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health, Salvador, Bahia/North
East, Brazil;2National Counsel of Technological and Scientific
Development, Brasilia, Brazil.
Introduction
Hypovitaminosis D is a biochemical change with high prevalence among the
population, especially in obese patients. Its function more known relates to bones
metabolism, although recently, many functions have been described.
Methods
A descriptive cross-sectional study, which included women over 18 years old with
BMI  equal  or  superior  of
25 kg/m2. Anthropometric  measurements  were
obtained: weight, height, BMI, waist circumference, hip circumference; presence
of hypertension and/or metabolic syndrome were obtained by analysing the charts
of patients in the study. The criteria for diagnosing hypovitaminosis D was
established  according  to  The  Brazilian  Society  of  Endocrinology  and
Metabology: levels %20 ng/dl means deficiency, 21-29 ng/dl are considered
insufficiency and levels between 30 ng/dl and 100 ng/dl are normal.
Results
The sample consisted of 121 women with a mean age of 43G12 years, BMI of
37G6.5 kg/m2, the waist/hip ratio of 0.86G0.09 and the abdominal circumfer-
ence  of
109G13 cm.  The  prevalence  of  obesity  was  89.3%;  59%  of  the
population were hypertensive and 20% diabetics. The mean of the level of
vitamin D was 23.5G6 ng/dl. Hypovitaminosis D was observed in 84.6% of the
population, 25.6% are vitamin D deficient and 59% are insufficient. The values of
the biochemical in the groups obesity and overweight were respectively: 26.8G
7 ng/dl and 23.1G6 (PZ0.1) for vitamin D, 41.7 (26.4-37.4) pg/ml and 63.3
(PZ0.03) for parathormone, 10.1G1 and 9.4G0.7 mg/dl (PZ0.052) calcium
and 3.8 mg/dl (PZ0.84) in both groups for phosphorus. It was observed an
inverse correlation between BMI and the levels of vitamin D (PZ0.04).
Conclusion
The prevalence of hypovitaminosis among patients with excess of height is higher
than in the general population. There is an inverse correlation between the levels
of vitamin D and BMI.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP177
EP178
A Rare Case of Intracranial Calcification: Fahr Disease
Merve Yilmaz1, Asli Tanrivermis2, Demet Yalcin Kehribar3,
Neslihan Unal Akdemir4, Adnan Karadas3 & Ozkan Akyol3
1Samsun Gazi State Hospital, Endocrinology Department, Samsun, Turkey;
2Ondokuz Mayis University Medical Faculty, Radyology Department,
Samsun, Turkey;3Samsun Gazi State Hospital, Internal Medicine
Department, Samsun, Turkey;4Samsun Gazi State Hospital, Neurology
Department, Samsun, Turkey;5Samsun Gazi State Hospital, Internal
Medicine Department, Samsun, Turkey;6Samsun Gazi State Hospital,
Internal Medicine Department, Samsun, Turkey.
Introduction
Fahr disease, is a rare pathology characterized by neuropsychiatric symptoms and
bilateral  symmetrical  intracranial,  especially  basal  ganglial  calcifications.
Although the exact etiology is not known, it is often associated with calcium
and phosphorus metabolism disorders. We aim to present two brothers who
presented with Fahr’s disease which is a rare condition.
Case
Sixty-year-old male patient without a medical history of ilness was admitted to
the  neurology  clinic  with  speech  disorder  and  seizure.  After  neurological
evaluation of the patient, the brain computerized tomography was performed and
revealed  bilateral  symmetrical  calcifications  in  basal  ganglia,  thalamus,
periventricular white matter, centrum semiovale and dentate nucleus of the
cerebellum (Figure 1).
Patient was referred to our clinic with the preliminary diagnosis of Fahr disease.
In his medical history he had speech disorder for 3 years and received irregular
treatment. He didn’t have any pathological findings on physical examination. The
results of laboratory tests were normal except vitamin D deficiency. The diagnosis
of Fahr disease was thought and vitamin D treatment was started. 1 year after
brother  were  evaluated  by  a  neurologist  for
5
years  with  syncope  and
forgetfulness  complaints.  Cranial  MRI  supported  Fahr  disease.  Vitamin  D
deficiency was found and vitamin D therapy was started. The patients is still being
followed by neurology and endocrinology.
Discussion and Results
Patients with Fahr disease frequently admit with neuropsychiatric, extrapyramidal
and cerebellar signs, speech impairment and dementia. The association between
severity of clinical symptoms and the location and severity of calcification was
reported previously. Substitution of calcium and vitamin D corrects the metabolic
abnormality and slows down the clinical progression. In conclusion, in patients
presenting with neurological symptoms, particularly when bilateral symmetric
calcifications of the basal ganglia is detected, the Fahr’s disease should be considered
in the differential diagnosis and calcium metabolism should be evaluated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP178
EP179
Giant-cell tumor: hyperparathyroidisme is not always involved - a case
report
Ghada Saad, Emna Dendana, Yosra Hasni, Maha Kacem, Amel Maaroufi,
Molka Chadli & Kousay Ach
Endocrinology and Diabetology Department, Farhat Hached Hospital,
Sousse, Tunisia.
Giant-cell tumor is a skeletal disorder that occurs secondarily to hyperparathyr-
oidism and is caused by long-term stimulation of parathyroid hormone (PTH)
excess. The overactivity and proliferation of osteoclasts stimulated by PTH
breaks down bone and leads to replacement of bone matrix and thinning of the
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
cortex. True giant-cell tumor is a rare jaw osteolytic benign tumor belonging to
the larger family of giant-cell tumors.
We report the case of a 47 years old female patient without significant personal
history. The patient was referred to us for hyperparathyroidism after being
operated in maxillofacial surgery department for a right mandibular tumor
progressing  from
1 year  associated  with  muscle  cramps  and  fatigue.  The
pathology  exam  found  a  giant-cell  tumor.  Blood  exams  showed:  PTHZ
81.5 pg/ml, Serum CalciumZ2.5 mmol/l, serum phosphorusZ1.3 mmol/l and
creatinineZ63 mmol/l. Cervical ultrasound showed a left lower pole parathyroid
adenoma. The para- thyroid scintigraphy showed no parathyroid or ectopic tumor.
No other bone lesions were found on bone scintigraphy. Since the calcium rate
was normal (2.5 mmol/l), we investigated the 25 (OH) Vitamin D3 level. Our
patient had a vitamin D deficiency.
Thus the diagnosis was a secondary hyperparathyroidism caused by a vitamin D
deficiency associated to a giant cell tumor. The jaw tumor syndrome was
eliminated due to the lack of hyperparathyroidism in the family history and to the
absence of uterine fibroids and renal cysts in our patient.
This case illustrates the simultaneous combination of a mandibular giant cell
tumor and a normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism. The vitamin D dosage rectified
the diagnosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP179
EP180
Which social factors that may be associated with high parathyroid
hormon levels in postmenapausal women?
Irfan Esen1, Selin Akturk Esen1, Soner Cander3, Ozen Oz Gul2 &
Erdinc Erturk2
1
Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Internal Medicine,
Bursa, Turkey;2Uludag University Medical School, Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;3Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research
Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey.
In this study, we aimed to investigate the causes of elevated PTH levels in
postmenopausal women without the use of drugs that may affect of PTH levels
and without concomitant diseases.
A total of 156 postmenopausal women, aged R 50 years, had no menstruation for
at least 2 years and had no disease known to affect calcium metabolism were
considered. Education, occupation, average duration of exposure to sunlight per
day in summer and winter, consumption of calcium-rich foods of people were
questioned.  Participants  were  divided  into  four  groups  according  to  their
educational levels, and they were divided into two groups according to their
religious beliefs: covered and non-covered people. They were also classified
according to their occupational status as housewives, workers and retired people.
Sunlight exposure behavior was measured by one question; less than 30 min was
considered inadequate exposure, from 30 to 60 min was considered moderate
exposure and more than 60 min exposure was considered sufficient. People, who
had more than daily 500 mg calcium consumption and less than daily 500 mg
calcium consumption, were divided into two groups.
When all cases were evaluated together, serum PTH levels were significantly
higher in housewives than workers and retired people (P!0.001); in participants
with less than a high school graduates than more than with a high school graduates
(PZ0.008); in covered people than non-covered people (PZ0.025). Living alone
and smoking were found to have no effect on serum PTH levels. PTH levels were
not significantly different between with adequate calcium consumption and
inadequate calcium consumption and between insufficient sunlight exposure and
sufficient sunlight exposure.
Considering all cases, women whom are defined as housewife, dressed up
covering their head and arms and with education level less than high school have
statistically significant elevated parathyroid hormone levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP180
EP181
Mean platelet volume in a patient with hypoparathyroidism: the
relationship between metabolic syndrome, impaired fasting glucose and
cardiovascular risk
Handan Cipil1, Ozge Timur2, Hakan Sevimli2, Faruk Yildiz2, Mustafa Utlu2,
Abdulmuttalip Arslan2, Esra Nur Ademoglu3, Mehmet Emin Budak2,
Idris Baydar2, Melek Kadi4 & Ayse Carlioglu5
1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medicine Faculty, Department of
Internal Medicine, Konya, Turkey;2Regional Training and Research
Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey;
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
3
Abant Izzet Baysal University Medicine Faculty, Department of Internal
Medicine, Bolu, Turkey;4Regional Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Dermatology, Erzurum, Turkey;5Regional Training and
Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, Erzurum, Turkey.
Background
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is a key regulator of mineral metabolism, the
homeostasis of calcium, phospate, vitamin D and bone turnover. Hypoparathyr-
oidism is a rare disease characterized by hypocalceamia with inappropriately low
plasma levels of PTH. Mean platelet volume (MPV) is the measure of platelet
size. Increased MPV has been associated with cardiovascular risk.
Objective
In our preliminary study, we aim to show that untreated hypoparathyroid patients
compared with hyperparathyroid patients and control group have also increased
risk of cardiovascular diseases and metabolic syndrome due to increased MPV.
Materials and Method
Sixty seven hypoparathyroid (45 postsurgical hypoparathyroid and 22 idiopathic
hypoparathyroid), 37 hyperparathyroid patients and 32 control were included this
study. All the patients have been followed by hypoparathyroidism at least one
year. All of them were receiving calcium and vitamin D analog supplements.
Patients were not given any drugs affectinf platelet funciyon at least 2 weeks (eg.
Aceltyl saliclate, antiepileptics, heparin, antithyroid drugs etc.) chronic illness,
smoking and having alcohol was also exclusion criteria. In order to eliminate the
conditions that can affect MPV levels, can cause tendencey to cardiovascular
diseases  and  metabolic  syndrome  fasting  glucose  and  serum  lipids  were
evaluated.
Results
When  groups  were  seperately  compared  with  control  group,
7
idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism (% 31.8, P: 0.02), 16 post surgery hypoparathyroidism
(% 29, P:0.015), 15 hyperparathyroidism patients (%35.7, P:0.003) and 5 control
(%10, P!0.05) patients had metabolic syndrome. MPV levels were statistically
significant  higher  in  postsurgical  and  idiopathic  hypoparathyroidism  and
hyperparathyroidism  gropu  than control group. BMI, age  and gender  were
independent predictive factors of MPV. Adjusment for other factors did not alter
these relative risks.
Conclusion
These study assesed MPV and relationship between metabolic syndrome and
cardiovascular disease risk. In this study, we have shown that MPV levels were
higher in hypoparathyroidism groups than control group. The main problem
seems to be low calcium levels in patients with hypoparathyroidism. Thus, in
hypoparathyroid patients appropriate calcium and vitamin D replacement therapy
can protect from cardiovascular risk.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP181
EP182
Clinical case of chronic calcific pancreatitis in a patient with
parathyroid carcinoma caused primary hyperparathyroidism
Timur Britvin, Vyacheslav Ignatyuk & Armine Kazarian
State Budget Institution of Health of the Moscow region “Moscow Regional
Research Clinical Institute”, Moscow, Russia.
Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare cause of primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT)
and is usually presented with severe hypercalcaemia and parathyroid hormone
(PTH) elevation. Hypercalcaemia can lead to calcification of parenchymatous
organs, including pancreas, and acute or chronic pancreatitis.
Case report
A 46-year-old woman was admitted to the endocrine surgery department of our
institution with severe weakness, appetite and weight loss (25 kg in a year),
abdominal  and  joint  pain,  apathy,  skin  dryness.  Laboratory  tests:  PTH
2517.4 pg/ml
(11-62),  total  serum  calcium
3.36 mmol/l
(2.2-2.6),  ionized
serum calcium 2.14 mmol/l (1.12-1.32), amylase 1280 U/l (!100). Neck US:
left lobe of thyroid gland is presented with a heterogenous nodule with cystic
degeneration, 5.0!3.0!3.5 cm. Neck CT-scan: a 37!26!51 mm mass near
the back margin of left thyroid lobe, 53 HU density in the native examination, 64
HU in the arterial phase of contrast examination and 50 HU in the venous phase.
The upper pole of the tumor is located at the thyroid cartilage, the lower pole of
the tumor is in the mediastinum. Abdomen CT-scan: pancreas is located normally,
with uneven margins and multiple calcifications. A 12 mm cyst in the body of
pancreas and a cyst of irregular shape in the tail with thick calcificated border
(78!46!48 mm) are detected. Pancreatic duct is not dilated.
At first, parathyroid tumor resection and hemithyroidectomy were performed.
After the surgery PTH lowered to 193 pg/ml and hypocalcaemia (total Ca
1.91 mmol/l, ionized Ca 0.94 mmol/l) occurred, treated with calcium and vitamin D
supplement. Parathyroid carcinoma was confirmed by histology. Two months
later subtotal distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy were performed. Three
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
months  after  the  treatment  the  patient’s  health  improved,  abdominal  pain
disappeared and she gained 5 kg. PHPT is not persisting.
This case report shows that chronic calcific cystic pancreatitis can develop on the
background of hypercalcaemia and improve after parathyroid tumor resection.
We suggest that serum calcium and PTH should be measured in all patients with
non-alcoholic and non-biliary pancreatitis for PHPT diagnostic and pancreatitis
should be diagnosed in all patients with PHPT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP182
EP183
The relationship between obesity and serum Vitamin B12, folic acid,
vitamin D concentrations in obes adults: a retrospective study
Fidan Canan Celik Yagan1, Gulcin Gungor Olcum2, Duygu Kurtulus3 &
Haci Bayram Tugtekin2
1Umraniye Training and Research Hospital Family Medicine Department,
Istanbul, Turkey;2Umraniye Training and Research Hospital Internal
Medicine Department, Istanbul, Turkey;3Umraniye Training and Research
Hospital Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Background
Obesity is associated with many diseases. e.g. cardiovascular diseases. The most
common deficiency associated with obesity seems to be low concentrations
of vitamin D that is associated with an increased risk of diabetes and other
cardiovascular diseases. Low concentrations of vitamins are linked to accelerated
atherosclerosis through increased oxidative stress. The purpose of this research
was to investigate the association between obesity and vitamin B12(VB12), folic
asid(FA) and vitamin D(VD) levels in patients.
Matherial-Method
The study was conducted at the outpatient clinic at Umraniye Research Hospital,
between January and june 2015. We ennrolled 100 patients. Exclusion criteria
included being a strict vegetarian, being over 50 or less than 18, current use of
corticosteroids or vitamin supplements, long term use of proton pump inhibitors
and intestinal absorbtion diseases. Blood was taken after a 8-12 hours overnight
fasting and serum VB12, FA and VD levels are measured. BMI was calculated
using the following formula: kg/height (m2). We found P!0.05 (statistical
significance).
Results
Demographic  details  are  in  Table
1.  There  was  no  statistically  significant
correlation  between  BMI  and  VB12
or  FA  levels
(PO0.05).  Significant
correlation  exists  between  BMI  and  VD  levels
(P!0.05). There is no a
significant relationship between age and VB12, FA and VD levels.
Table 1 demographics and labratuary findings.
Total
Male (n:18)
Female (n:82)
Age (years)
34.39
(0.89 S.D.)
36.1
(2.11 S.D.)
34.0
(0.98 S.D.)
BMI
27.85
(0.74 S.D.)
27.9
(1.30 S.D.)
27.8
(0.87 S.D.)
Vitamin B12
300.6
(13.64 S.D.)
245.8
(16.24 S.D.)
312.7
(15.99 S.D.)
Folic Acid
8.31
(0.32 S.D.)
8.16
(0.53 S.D.)
8.34
(0.37 S.D.)
Vitamin D
12.21
(0.85 S.D.)
12.47
(1.16 S.D.)
12.16
(1.00 S.D.)
Conclusion
We compared VB12 status in patiens with obesity and can’t find any significant
corelation. There is not enough research about FA levels in obesity but we found
no  correlation  between  obesity  and  serum  FA  levels.  VD  deficiency  and
secondary hyperparathyroidism are known to be prevalent in obesity and we find a
significant correlation in our study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP183
EP184
Our cases of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
Muharrem Bayrak1, Kenan 
¸ adırcı1, Ay¸e 
¸ arlıog˘ lu1, Hakan Sevimli1 &
S¸ enay Durmaz2
1Training and Research Hospıtal, Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of Internal
Medicine, Kırıkkale University, Kırıkkale, Turkey.
Familial  hypocalciuric  hypercalcemia  is  an  inherited  disease  caused  by
inactivating heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding calcium-sensitive
receptors, that affects calcium metabolism and generally follows a benign course.
It must be also considered in the differential diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism.
Six patients presenting to our internal diseases clinic between January, 2010, and
June, 2015, were evaluated in terms of clinical and biochemical parameters. The
youngest of our patients was 21 and the oldest was 86. Four were women and two
were men. The children of five of our cases and the mother of one were assessed in
a polyclinic environment. At evaluation, the presence of familial hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia was considered on the basis of moderate hypercalcemia, threshold
elevated  parathormone  levels  and  a  significant  decrease  in  daily  calcium
expulsion  in  urine.  Diagnosis  was  confirmed  in  five  patients  through
determination of similar laboratory findings for calcium metabolism in the
children,and also in the mother of our young patient, and on the basis of exclusion
of other causes of hypercalcemia. Assessment of calcium metabolism following
correction of other factors that may be affected will help  clinicians avoid
misdiagnosis.
Consideration of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia in the diagnostic approach
to hypercalcemia and at differential diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism
will prevent unnecessary surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP184
EP185
‘Hyngry bone syndrome’: after tertiary hypeparathyroïdism treatment
Mouna Mezoued, Meriem Stiti & Djamila Meskine
EPH Bologhine, Algiers, Algeria.
Post parthyroïdectomy hypocalcemia is a frequent situation, generally due to a
definitive or transient hypoparathyroïdism.
The ‘Hungry bone syndrome’, is a rare severe hypocalcemia etiology, assigned to
an excessive osseous avidity, occurring in intense bone remodeling situations like
fibrous osteitis or renal osteodystrophy.
We report a case of a 41 years old woman, presenting a chronic renal failure, at
hemodialysis stage, complicated by a tertiary hyperparathyroidism, which was
treated by a total parathyroïdectomy.
At  immediate  post  operative  follow-up  the  patient  presented  a  severe
hypocalcemia getting to 1.27 nmol/l, associated to a hypophosphoremia and
elevation of the alkaline phosphatasis by 4000 UI/L, by what we diagnosed a
‘Hungry bone syndrome’.
To control calcemia, we had to administrate a consequent dose of calcium and
vitamin D, reaching 8000 mg/day of calcium gluconate, and 4 mg/day of calcitriol.
In conclusion, the ‘Hungry bone syndrome’, is a rare severe hypocalcemia situation,
which is difficult to control; requiring an adequate managing. The prevention of this
disease could relie on a good post operative vitamin D deficit supplementation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP185
EP186
Calcium intake in Tunisian postmenopausal women: evaluation and
impact on diabetes
Wafa Grira, Hajer Kandara, Hana Zoubeidi, Houda Enneifer,
Leila Ben Salem & Claude Ben Slama
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Institute of
Nutrition, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Calcium intake is important to prevent osteoporosis in postmenopausal women.
The objectives of our study were to evaluate the daily dietary calcium intake in
postmenopausal  Tunisian  women,  to  compare  diabetic  and  non-diabetic
postmenopausal women in their calcium intake and finally to propose corrective
interventions to promote calcium intake and minimize the complications of
menopause.
Subjects and methods
The study involved 73 postmenopausal Tunisian women aged on average 61 years.
Demographics and lifestyle were assessed with a questionnaire. Clinical and
laboratory data were collected from medical records. Calcium intake was assessed
by a food survey type ‘food story’ and estimated by the BILNUT software.
Results
Average daily calcium intake of our women was 723.8 mg/day. Sixty eight
percent of these women had a daily calcium intake less than 800 mg/day. The
average daily calcium intake in diabetic women was slightly lower than in non-
diabetic (700.41 mg/day vs 778.04 mg/day). Diabetic women with HbA1c !7%
had calcium intake slightly higher than those HbA1c O7% (741.25 mg/day vs
696.93 mg/day) but the difference was no significant.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Discussion and conclusion
The average calcium intake of our postmenopausal women is considered very low
according to WHO. Only 1.3% of the patients had an intake deemed sufficient
according to WHO. These alarming results are related to a multiparty and low
educational context. These results encourage us to develop educational messages
about the importance of calcium intake in postmenopausal especially diabetic women.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP186
EP187
The role of cinacalcet in a patient with persistent hypercalcaemia
despite parathyroidectomy
Gideon Mlawa1,2, Dora Affam3 & Maria Silveira2
1Queens Hospital, London, UK;2Winchester Hospital, Hampshire, UK;
3Darent Valley Hospital, Kent, UK.
Introduction
Parathyroid adenoma is the commonest cause of primary hyperparathyroidism,
but 10% of these adenomas can be ectopic, leading to persistent and recurrent
hypercalcaemia.
Case
We present a case of 82 years old man was admitted in June 2011 with increasesd
confusion, slurred speech, poor balance (ataxia). He had no features of sepsis and
no other focal neurology. His past medical history included constipation, dry
eyes. He was on Aspirin, hypromellose, and laxido.
Blood test: Hb 15.2, WCC 8.3, NaC138, K 4.4, Urea 4.9, creatinine 84, ALP 70,
Cor ca2C3.12, PTH-9.6, phosphate 0.79, ALT 100, Myeloma screen negative,
Vitamin D 100, Urine: 24 h urinary calcium 8.2. Imaging;CXR normal, CT
normal, sestamibi scan normal. He underwent exploratory surgery left sided
parathyroidectomy July 2011 with normalisation of calcium levels initially.
Normal looking parathyroid tissue (140 g). One month later he had relapse of
hypercalcaemia.Readmitted for i.v. fluids & pamidronate Staging CT chest,
abdomen and pelvis-normal apart right subcarina lymphnode measuring 11 mm.
He remained hypercalcaemic despite multiple doses of i.v. pamidronate. He was
started on cinacalcet 30 mg od daily for presumed ectopic parathyroid adenoma.
Discussion
The commonest cause of hypercalcaemia is primary hyperparathyroidism, but
hypercalcaemia  due  to  ectopic  parathyroid  adenoma  although  rare  is  not
uncommon.
Conclusion
Cinacalcet can successful be used to control hypercalcaemia in patients with
persistent and recurrent hypercalcaemia due ectopic parathyroid adenoma as
demonstrated in this case report.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP187
EP188
Use of recombinant parathyroid hormone with significant improvement
of debilitating hypocalcaemia and hypomagnesaemia
Eleftheria Panteliou1, Ajith James2, Anna Hawkins1, Stuart Jones3,
Pandina Kwong3, Dinesh Gupta4, Yousaf Razzak4, Edel Casey1 &
Khash Nikookam1
1Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, King George’s Hospital,
Barking Havering and Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Greater
London, UK;2Department of Nephrology, King George’s Hospital, Barking
Havering and Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Greater London,
UK;3Department of Clinical Biochemistry, King George’s Hospital,
Barking Havering and Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Greater
London, UK;4Department of Pharmacology, King George’s Hospital,
Barking Havering and Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Greater
London, UK.
Primary hypoparathyroidism is a rare condition. Contrary to other endocrine
deficiencies  treated  with  hormone  replacement,  recombinant  parathyroid
hormone (PTH) is not currently licensed for its treatment in Europe. Emerging
evidence  of  efficacy  and  safety  of  recombinant  PTH  in  treating  resistant
hypoparathyroidism  will  hopefully  provide  a  new  tool  in  managing  this
challenging condition.
This is the case of a 45 year-old woman presenting with gradually worsening
paraesthesia  and  limb  weakness.  Initial  investigations  revealed  low  serum
calcium  of
1.58
(2.2-2.6 mmol/l),  magnesium  of
0.4
(0.7-1.05 mmol/l),
potassium of 3 (3.5-5 mmol/l) and normal phosphate 1.21 (0.8-1.5 mmol/l),
bicarbonate 27 (22-28 mmol/l), liver and renal function. Clinical examination
only revealed a positive Chovstek’s sign. Further investigations showed low PTH
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
at 0.6 (1.3-6.8 pmol/l), vitamin D at 14 (25-200 nmol/l) with elevated 24-h urine
calcium excretion at 13.1 (2.5-7.5 mmol/24 h), urine magnesium excretion of 3.9
(2.4-6.5 mmol/24 h), normal thyroid function, haematinics and a basal cortisol of
375 nmol/l. She had osteopenia on dual energy X-ray absorptiometry and normal
whole body computed-tomography, gastroscopy and coeliac screen. She was
initially treated with intravenous calcium and magnesium, subsequently switched
to oral supplements. She had recurrent admissions over 10 months with low
calcium and magnesium. Recombinant PTH(1-34) (teriparatide) led to normal-
isation of calcium and no further admissions.
In  this  case  hypoparathyroidism  was attributed to  severe renal  magnesium
wasting, related to an acquired mutation or a hereditary disorder clinically
emerging in adulthood. In the United Kingdom, the N-terminal active fragment
(1-34) of recombinant human PTH (teriparatide) is currently only licensed for the
treatment of osteoporosis. In 2015, the full-length PTH (1-84) was approved for
the treatment of hypoparathyroidism in the United States. The ‘Efficacy and
safety of recombinant human PTH (1-84) in hypoparathyroidism’ (REPLACE)
study  showed  good  tolerance  and  therapeutic  effect  of  PTH
(1-84)  in
hypoparathyroidism. Further studies are required to evaluate the role and efficacy
of  PTH  in  the  management  of  patients  with  resistant  and/or  persistent
hypocalcaemia and hypomagnesaemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP188
EP189
Severe hypercalcemia due to the vitamin D intoxication presenting with
acute renal failure
Hande Peynirci1, Pınar Sisman2, Fethullah Aydın2, Canan Ersoy2 &
Erdinç Erturk2
1Kastamonu State Hospital, Kastamonu, Turkey;2Uludag University
Medical School Internal Medicine Endocrinology and Metabolism
Department, Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Hypervitaminosis D is a rarely reported condition. It may be observed more
frequently because of the recent increase in supplement use of vitamin D. Herein,
we report a case of vitamin D intoxication which was the first case with this high
level of calcium as we searched the literature.
Case report
A 57-year old hypertensive woman admitted to our emergency room with symptoms
of constipation, loss of appetite and confusion. Blood pressure, heart rate, and body
temperature were 150/90 mmHg, 62 beats/min, and 36.68C, respectively. Dried
mucous membranes and decreased skin turgor tonus were observed. Routine
chemistry revealed; glucose 98 mg/dl (70-100), urea 88 mg/dl (10-50), creatinine
3.4 mg/dl (0.6-1.3),albumin 3.8 g/dl (3.5-5.0), serum calcium 22.7 mg/dl (8.4-10.2)
, serum phosphorus 2.5 mg/dl (2.3-4.7). Chest X-ray and the renal ultrasound was
normal. Corrected QT was found 260 m/s in electrocardiography.
The patient reported that she had been operated due to diagnosis of multinodular
goiter and hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism had developed postsurgically.
She admitted to the another hospital one month ago with a calcium value of
7.6 mg/dl.  At the  time  of  admission,  she  was  taking calcium
4000 mg/day,
cholecalciferol
3520 IU/day, calcitriol
0.5 mg/day. Treatment was  changed  as
calcium 6000 mg/day, cholecalciferol 5280 IU/day, calcitriol 1 mg/day. She was on
125 mg L-thyroxine therapy with a thyroid stimulating hormone level of 2.4 mIU/ml
(0.35-4.94 mIU/ml).
The patient was hospitalized to our endocrinology clinic and taken to the low calcium
hemodialysis. After hemodialysis, her calcium level decreased to 13.7 mg/dl. Then she
was managed by continuous saline infusion and diuretics. The level of serum calcium
and creatinine was 8.5 mg/dl, 1.1 mg/dl, respectively on the 8th day of treatment.
Conclusion
Vitamin D supplementation should be appropriately monitored due to potential risk of
intoxication.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP189
EP190
Case report of osteitis fibrosa cystica
Engy AbdelWahab, Wael Farrag, Nesreen Qoutb & Yaser AbdelRaof
Tanta University Hospital, Tanta, Egypt.
Female patient named M.F., aged 37 years was complaining of Dull aching pain
in her left shoulder, difficulty on lifting the left arm into right angle.
The patient had past history of generalised body aches.
The patient sought orthopaedic consultation because the pain in her left shoulder
became severe.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
X Ray on her left shoulder revealed an intamedullary infiltrative lesion in the
humerus of ground glass (Mouth eaten) appearance.
MRI of the left shoulder which revealed abnormal infiltrative bone marrow signals.
CT chest and body revealed Bony skeleton marrow infiltration, Left lower lung
nodule,  Multiple  hepatic  focal  lesions,  Splenomegaly
(Query  Leukemia  or
Deposits) and Bone marrow biopsy was adviced.
†  Laboratory  investigations  showed  normocytic  normochromic  anaemia
Serum Calcium: 7.7 mg/dl and Ionised Calcium 1 mmol/l.
†  Bone  marrow  aspiration  biopsy  which  revealed  Hyper-cellular  bone
marrow with erythroid hyperplasia.
†  PET  scan  revealed  Multiple  medullary  based  osteo-sclerotic  lesions
scattered all over the skeleton.
†  Other laboratory investigations Vitamin D level: 7.46 ng/ml.
†  Parathormone hormone: 198.9 pg/ml (normal range is 12-72).
†  Alkaline phosphatase: 315 U/l.
†  Patient underwent Bone marrow trephine biopsy from right superior
posterior iliac spine which revealed Fibrovascular Bone marrow, consistent
with osteitis fibrosa cystica related to parathyroid hyperfunction and that
was the final diagnosis.
†  The patient received treatment in the form of: Vitamin D supplements,
Calcium supplements, Calcitonin inhalation, Alpha calcidiol.
†  The patient received this treatment for 4 months, the pain in left shoulder
has improved and the body aches also improved.
†  February 2015: Total calcium: 9.5 mg/dl. Actual calcium: 1.30 mmol/l,
Vitamin D: 26 ng/ml. Parathormone hormone: 71 pg/ml.
†  The most recent X-ray showed improvement and follow up investigations
in January 2016 were all normal.
†  Conclusion: osteitis  fibrosa  cystica  can  present  in a  similar  way  as
Malignancy  clinically  and  radiologically  and  Vitamin  D  level  and
parathormone can be the only Key to diagnose it.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP190
EP191
Influence of hypercalcemia in the type 2 diabetes
Elena Brutskaya-Stempkovskaya1,2 & Alla Shepelkevich1
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;2Minsk City
Polyclinic N31, Minsk, Belarus.
Status of carbohydrate metabolism in patients with hypercalcaemia and the
influence of hypercalcemia on the risk of type 2 diabetes continue to be studied.
Objective
To study the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in patients with hypercalcemia and in
patients without hypercalcemia.
Materials and methods
Continuous survey of 1000 people, average age 54.68G16.96 (727 women, 273
men) from 18 to 96 years. Examination: total calcium, total protein, creatinine,
cholesterol and triglycerides with an analysis of morbidity (osteoporosis, kidney
stones, cholelithiasis, ulcer disease, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, coronary heart
disease, cardiovascular events, cancer, fractures in history).
Results
Hypercalcemia has been found in 26 people, mean age was 57.42G11.6 years.
Type 2 diabetes is detected in 5 (19.2%) patients with hypercalcemia and 118
(12.1%)  cases  with  type
2 diabetes were found among patients without
hypercalcaemia.
Significant differences was detected in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in patients
with hypercalcemia and in patients without hypercalcemia (c2Z0.57, P!0.0001).
Conclusion
The results of the study show an increasing prevalence of type 2 diabetes in patients
with hypercalcaemia. The results may indicate the influence of hypercalcemia in the
frequency of manifestation of type 2 diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP191
EP192
Dysarthria: a subject of neurology? What about endocrinology?
Cigdem Tura Bahadir & Sinan Bahadir
Tokat State Hospital, Tokat, Turkey.
Objective
Dysarthria is a motor speech disorder resulting from impairment in strength,
speed and coordination of neural and/or muscular structures that are related to
respiration, voice and speech. They may be classified as motor neuron dysarthria,
cerebellar dysarthria and extrapyramidal dysarthria (subdivided as hypokinetic
and hyperkinetic). Patients with dysarthria are evaluated primarily by neurology
specialists. Though, we present our case to emphasize that dysarthria may not
only result from neurological disorders but also metabolical disorders.
Case report
A 51-year-old male patient was brought to emergency clinic with complaint of
sudden onset speech disorder. With prediagnosis of cerebrovascular disorder,
cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT)
scan were performed. For presence hyperdense lesions in CT scan, he was
consulted  to  a  neurosurgery  specialist  with  prediagnosis  of  intracerebral
hemorrhage. Lesions were not considered as hemorrhage by the neurosurgeon
did not consider the lesions as intracerebral  hemorrhage or subarachnoidal
hemorrhage and referred the patient to neurology department for basal ganglia
pathology. Patient’s clinical and radiological findings was not considered as
cerebrovascular disease by neurology. There was no low ADC values to suggest
acute  stroke  in  diffusion  weighted  MRI.  Cerebral  MRI  revealed  T2A
hyperintensity in supratentorial periventricular regions suggesting leukoaraiosis.
Cranial CT scan revealed calcifications in deep gray matter, thalamus, supra- and
infratentorial regions and was reported as Fahr’s diseased. Total serum calcium
level was low (4.5 mg/dl). Ionized calcium study was not available. From his
background evaluation, he complaint of tingling in his hands and muscle cramps
for a few years. He had a history of pathological fracture in his leg 20 years before
and there was gait disturbance.
His physical and neurological examinations were performed. He was awake but
dysoriented. Dysarthria was present. Chvostek and Trousseau signs were positive.
Respiratory system, cardiovascular system and abdominal examinations were
normal. There was genu varum deformity in lower extremities. He had candida
onychomycosis in his hands and feet and hyperpigmented regions on the anterior
part of tibia secondary to convlescent exematous lesions. Bone mineral density T
scores in the distal radius, lumbar spine and femur neck were K5.7, K0.1 and
C1.5  respectively.  Total  serum  calcium,  parathyroid  hormone
(PTH)  and
magnesium levels were low, and phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
levels were high. Urea, creatinine, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), sodium, potassium, chlorine and thyroid hormone levels
were normal. The patient who had primary hypoparathyroidism and mucocuta-
neous candidiasis is diagnosed with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy type 1. The
patient was given peroral calcitriol, peroral and intravenous calcium and peroral
magnesium  daily.  He  was  in  need  of  high  dose  calcium.  For  candida
onychomycosis, terbinafine was given.
During follow-up, dysarthia was improved and cramps did nor reccur. Celiac
disease  was  ruled  out.  He  was  discharged  with  peroral  calcium  carbonate
3000 mg/day and peroral calcitriol 3 mg/day.
Result
Though dysarthria originates mostly from neurological disorders, metabolic
disorders should also be looked for.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP192
EP193
Pregnancy with Fahr’s disease: a rare case report
Ferhat Gokay1, Yasin Simsek1, Ali Yesiltepe2 & Oguzhan Sitki Dizdar2
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kayseri Training and
Research Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine,
Kayseri Training and Research Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey.
Introduction
Fahr’s disease is a rare, neurological disorder characterized by abnormal calcified
deposits in basal ganglia. The clinical characteristics are various and usually
appears such as disfunction of the affected areas. According to our knowledge, no
case of Fahr’s disease together with pregnancy has been described in the literature
until now. The objective of this case report was to describe the clinical course of
this rare condition in pregnancy.
Case report
We reported 28-year-old pregnant woman with Fahr’s disease. She was diagnosed
Fahr’s disease by using physical, laboratory and radiological examination 3 years
ago. She had no complaint about neurological and endocrinological during
pregnancy. Her pregnancy was uneventful until the day of delivery.
Conclusion
Fahr’s disease may not negative effect the pregnancy. However, in this regard,
series of cases are needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP193
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP194
Pseudohypoparathyroidism with seizure: a rare case report
Ferhat Gokay1, Yasin Simsek1, Oguzhan Sitki Dizdar2 & Ozerhan Ozer2
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Training and Research
Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Kayseri
Training and Research Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey.
Introduction
Pseudohypoparathyroidism is characterised by hypocalcaemia, hyperphospha-
taemia, increased serum parathyroid hormone values and insensitivity to the
biological activity of parathyroid hormone. Pseudohypoparathyroidism is often
associated  with  a  characteristic  phenotype  known  as  Albright’s  hereditary
osteodystrophy. This case was reported in order to remind pseudohypoparathyr-
oidism in patients with hypocalcemic seizures.
Case report
We describe a 50-year-old man who presented with seizure due to hypocalcemia.
He has typical features of Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy, which include a
round face, short neck and stature and brachydactyly. Diffuse calsifications were
seen on the bilateral cerebellum, putamen and dentate nucleus in computarized
tomography.  The  patient  is  treated  successfully  by  calcium  carbonate  and
calcitriol supplementation.
Conclusion
Pseudohypoparathyroidism  can  present  with  unusual  manifestations  in  the
adulthood such as hypocalcaemia related seizures.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP194
EP194B
Surgical treatment the patients with tertiary hyperparathyroidism
Igor Makarov1, Aleksandr Sidorov1, Ivan Koposov2 & Viktoria Kletter2
1State Medical University, Russia, Russia;2Samara Railway Clinical
Hospital, Russia, Russia.
Introduction
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism (THPT) develops for the patients with chronic
kidney diseases undergoes program hemodialysis. THPT is seen in patients with
long-term secondary hyperparathyroidism which eventually leads to hyperplasia
of the parathyroid glands (PTG) then it leads to adenomatous transformation and
autonomization of the PTG.
The purpose of the study is the choice of rational diagnostic and treatment
algorithm for the patients with THPT.
Methods/design
From 2013 to 2015 years 38 patients (12 woman, 26 man) with THPT were
operated. The age was from 34 to 81 years. 29 people (76.3%) were older than
50 years. We detected levels parathyroid hormone (PTH), ionized calcium and
phosphorus.  We  did  make  sonography  thyroid  and  parathyroid  glands,
scintigraphy and MRI neck.
Results
Primordial level ionized calcium was 1.10G0.3 mmol/l, level PTH - 946.3G
352.8 pg/ml, phosphorus - 1.72G0.2 mmol/l.
During operations one adenoma was removed at eight patients, on two adenomas
removed from six patients. 19 patients have removed three adenomas and five
patients - five adenomas. A total of 102 adenomas were removed from 38 people.
Repeated operations were conducted in eight cases. The diagnosis were confirmed
by histological studies.
Of the 16 patients with multiple lesions of the PTG (3 or more) only in 11 cases
with scintigraphy were found signs of one or two gland. Ultrasound detect
parathyroid adenomas only in 70-75% cases. MRI identifies adenomas in 31
(96.9%) cases.
In time operation thyroid nodules were found at 15 (39.5%) patients. At five cases
were make subtotal thyroidectomies, at 4 cases - hemithyroidectomies and at six
cases - resections of thyroid.
PTH after operations decreased to 302.6G195.4 pg/ml, and a week later was
within or below the normal reference values at 78.9% of patients.
Conclusion
Sonography and scintigraphy PTG were detect adenomas in 70-75% cases,
because the MRI necessary became for the algorithm investigation. Concomitant
lesions of the thyroid and parathyroid glands were observed in more than 1/3 of
the cases. Patients with THPT have needs for the lifelong follow-up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP194B
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Cardiovascular Endocrinology and Lipid Metabolism
EP195
Liposomal prednisolone promotes macrophage necroptosis in
experimental atherosclerosis: does this explain atherogenesis in
Cushing’s disease?
Dominik M Schulte1,2, Fleur M van der Valk1, Svenja Meiler3, Jun Tang4,
Kang He Zheng1, Jan van den Bossche3, Tom Seijkens3, Matthias Laudes2,
Menno de Winther3, Esther Lutgens3, Amr Alaarg5, Josbert M Metselaar5,
Geesje M Dallinga-Thie1, Willem J M Mulder1,4, Erik S G Stroes1 & Anouk
A J Hamers1
1Department of Vascular Medicine, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
2Department of Internal Medicine I, UKSH, Kiel, Germany;3Experimental
Vascular Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry, AMC, Amster-
dam, The Netherlands;4Translational and Molecular Imaging Institute,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA;5Department of
Biomaterials Science and Technology, Targeted Therapeutics section,
MIRA Institute, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
Introduction
Patients with a Cushing syndrome - a glucocorticoid driven disease-have a high
risk for cardiovascular events, mainly due to atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a
lipid-driven inflammatory disease, for which novel anti-inflammatory strategies
like glucocorticoids are under evaluation. Thus, the impact of glucocorticoids on
atherosclerosis seems to be ambiguous: pro- or anti-inflammatory. To avoid
systemic glucocorticoid side effects contributing to atherosclerosis liposomal
nanoparticles loaded with prednisolone phosphate (LN-PLP) can directly target
the side of atherosclerosis. We aimed to unravel the direct effects of LN-PLP on
macrophages residing in the lipid-rich environment of atherosclerosis.
Description of methods/design
Low-density lipoprotein receptor knockout (LDLrK/K) mice were fed a high fat
diet. Biweekly injections of LN-PLP at 10 mg/kg have been performed over 2 and
6 weeks. Post mortem, local delivery and intrinsic effects of LN-PLP have been
studied on the aortic tissue. In vitro, murine and human macrophages were
exposed to LN-PLP to study the effect of lipid trafficking endoplasmatic reticulum
(ER) stress and apoptosis.
Results
We  show that LN-PLP accumulated  in plaque  macrophages and  enhanced
monocyte recruitment to atherosclerotic plaques after 2 weeks, followed by
increased macrophage content, more advanced plaque stages, and larger necrotic
core sizes after 6 weeks of LN-PLP administration. In vitro, murine and human
macrophages polarize into a lipid-avid phenotype after LN-PLP exposure, leading
to increased lipid accumulation, ER stress and necroptosis.
Conclusions
These findings indicate that macrophage targeting in plaques with prednisolone
may  accelerate  atherosclerosis  by  promoting  macrophage  lipotoxicity  and
necroptosis, thereby highlighting the challenges of anti-inflammatory therapy in
atherosclerosis. This model might explain atherogenesis in Cushing’s disease and
unravel new mechanisms than can be used for medical treatment reducing the
cardio-vascular risk of these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP195
EP196
24-Hour blood pressure homeostasis and renal function in subjects with
and without metabolic syndrome
Barbara Limberger Nedel, Leticia Tedesco Silva, Tassia Pazinato,
Luciana Antoniolli, Vanessa Piccoli, Mayara Beer & Fernando Gerchman
Universidade Federal Do Rio Grande Do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Introduction
Metabolic syndrome (MS) is related with progressive decrease of renal function.
Although hypertension has a major role on this relationship, it is not clear how its
behavior is related to decreased renal function.
Objective
To study how blood pressure (BP) measured by 24-hour ambulatory BP is related
to renal function in patients with and without MS.
Methods
We designed a cross-sectional study of consecutive individuals (nZ108; females
74%; 52.8G12.7 years; meanGS.D.) from the diabetes clinic of a university
hospital. Patients were classified according to their BP behavior: normotension
(NT; nZ29), white-coat hypertension (WCH; nZ19) and ambulatory hyperten-
sion
(AHT;  nZ57).  Fasting  and
2 h-plasma  glucose  levels,  lipid  profile,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
creatinine  and
24-h  urinary  albumin  excretion
(UAER)  were  measured.
Glomerular filtration  rate
(GFR)  was estimated  by the CKD-EPI  equation.
A two-sided P value !0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Estimated GFR (EGFR) was lower in subjects with MS than in those without
MS (MeanGS.D.; 90G20 vs 98.8G16.5; PZ0.047). EGFR was related to age
(rZK0.666; P!0.001), fasting glucose (rZ0.223; PZ0.021), and 24-h systolic
BP (rZK0.196; PZ0.044), but not to diastolic BP. EGFR was inversely related
to sleep-time BP (rZK0.224; PZ0.021), morning systolic BP (rZK0.224;
PZ0.030) and pulse pressure (rZK0.233; PZ0.170). Subjects with WCH and
AHT compared to those with NT had lower EGFR (MeanGS.D.; 89.3G18 vs
89.6G26.3 vs 100.2G14.8; PZ0.036) and higher UAER (Median [P25-75];
1 [0-5.3] vs 6.1 [1-19] vs 6.3 [1-16.8]; PZ0.031).
Conclusion
A higher sleep-time BP, morning systolic BP, and pulse pressure were the
components of BP homeostasis mostly related to decreased renal function and
may be taken into account in the assessment of subjects with MS. The findings
should prompt further research in order to evaluate whether or not interventions
impacting on BP during sleep-time and early morning period may prevent renal
damage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP196
EP197
Effects of gender and menopausal status on serum apolipoprotein
concentrations
Panagiotis Anagnostis1, John Stevenson2, David Crook3,
Desmond Johnston4 & Ian Godsland4
1Unit of Reproductive Endocrinology, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Medical School, Thessaloniki, Greece;2National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Royal Brompton Campus,
London, UK;3Clinical Investigations and Research Unit, Royal Sussex
County Hospital, Sussex, London, UK;4Diabetes Endocrinology and
Metabolic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, St.
Mary’s Campus, London, UK.
Introduction
Inconsistent data exist as to whether menopause is associated with increased
cardiovascular  disease
(CVD)  risk.  However,  few  studies  have  evaluated
differences in apolipoprotein metabolism according to menopausal status and
gender. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of gender and
menopause on serum apolipoprotein B (apoB), A-I (apoA-I) and A-II (apoA-II)
concentrations.
Methods/design
A cross-sectional analysis was undertaken of age and gender-related differences
in apparently healthy Caucasian premenopausal and postmenopausal women
not taking oral contraceptives or hormone replacement, and Caucasian men. Mea-
surements included serum apoA-I, apoA-II, apoB, total cholesterol, low-density
and  high-density  lipoprotein  cholesterol
(LDL-C  and  HDL-C  respectively),
triglycerides, cholesterol in HDL subfractions 2 and 3 and the apoB/apoA-I,
LDL-C/apoB,  HDL-C/apoA-I  and  HDL-C/apoA-II  ratios.  Analyses  were
undertaken with and without standardization for confounding characteristics
and in 5-year age ranges.
Results
One hundred and nine pre-menopausal women (aged 32.9G5.4 years), 253 post-
menopausal women (aged 57G6.5 years) and 307 men (aged 52.4G10.5 years)
were included in the analysis.
Overall,  apoB  concentrations  were  highest  in  men  but  rose  with  age  and
menopause in women to converge with concentrations in men in the age range
50-55 years. The LDL-C/apoB ratio was generally higher in women than men,
especially postmenopausally.
Both apoA-I and apoA-II concentrations were highest in postmenopausal women
and lowest in men. Men generally had the lowest ratios of HDL-C to apoA-I and
to apoA-II, but the highest ratios were apparent in premenopausal women. In
multivariable analyses, incorporating age, BMI, smoking, alcohol, exercise and
number of pregnancies, the above differences were sustained.
Conclusions
Adverse effects of ageing in women, male gender and menopause on apoB
concentrations  and  of  menopause  and,  in  particular,  male  gender  on  the
cholesterol content of HDL particles were consistent with adverse effects on
CVD risk, with male gender having the greatest effect.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP197
EP198
Urinary Albumin Excretion and Cardiovascular Risk in Nondiabetic
Middle-Aged Adults: the 2011-2012 Korean National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey
Jin Hwa Kim, Hee Jung Ahn & Sang Yong Kim
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Chosun University Hospital,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
Introduction
Microalbuminuria is known as a predictor of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in
patients with and without diabetes, as well as the general population. The
objective was to determine whether there was an association between the urinary
albumin excretion and CVD risk by estimating the Framingham Risk Score (FRS)
in nondiabetic middle-aged adults.
Methods
This study was based on data from the Korea National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, which was conducted by the Korean Ministry of Health
and Welfare in 2011-2012. From the 16 576 participants, data for 5165 adults
who were 40-79 years of age were included in the analysis. Based on the
urinary albumin to creatinine ratio (UACR), the subjects were categorized into
normal
(%9.9 mg/g),  high  normal
(10.0-29.9 mg/g),  and  microalbuminuria
(30.0-299.9 mg/g) groups.
Results
The mean FRS increased with increases in the UACR: 11.53G0.09 in the normal,
12.50G0.28 in the high normal, and 13.18G0.32 in the microalbuminuria in
men; 10.32G0.14 in the normal, 13.10G0.32 in the high normal, and 14.00G
0.48 in the microalbuminuria in women. After fully adjusting for potential
confounding factors, including lifestyle, sociodemographic factors, known CVD
risk  factors,  and  eGFR,  high  normal  levels  and  microalbuminuria  were
significantly associated with R10% 10-year risk of CVD (odds ratio (OR)
1.777
(95% confidence interval (CI), 1.216-2.597) and OR 2.232 (1.197-4.160),
respectively)  compared  with  the  normal  in  men.  High  normal  levels  and
microalbuminuria were also significantly associated with a R10% 10-year risk of
CVD (OR 2.041 (1.173-3.550) and OR 3.115 (1.538-6.308), respectively) after
adjusting for the above covariates in women.
Conclusions
Urinary albumin excretion reflects CVD risk in nondiabetic middle-aged adults
and high normal levels and microalbuminuria were independently associated with
a higher risk of CVD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP198
EP199
Hormonal treatment in a young and middle-aged population of
transgender persons: impact on metabolic parameters
Oscar Levalle, Alberto Nagelberg, Juan Gamez, Betiana Perez,
Amalia Ghiglioni, Eduardo Mormandi & Patricia Otero
Durand Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
The  sex-specific  sex  steroid  profile  seems  to  be  associated  to  the  gender
differences between males and females on metabolic and cardiovascular risk
(CVR). Objetive: to examine the effects of cross-gender sex steroid exposure on
metabolic and CVR parameters. We incorporated 152 women transgender (WT),
age (Median) 31 yr old (16-62) and 76 male transgender (MT) age: 25 yr old
(17-53), treated at least by 1 year. WT received transdermal 17ßEstradiol (E2)
50 mg/dayCcyproterone acetate (up to 50 mg/day) and MT received transdermal
Testosterone (T) 5 g/day or T-undecanoate (1000 mg i.m./12 weeks). Waist and
hip circumference, BMI, T, E2, lipids, glucose, insulin and HOMA index, were
measured at baseline and after 1-year of treatment. Group WT: No changes in the
anthropometric variables were detected. T decreased from 5.1G2.3 to 0.96G
1.4 ng/ml, P!0.0001. E2 and prolactin increased: 38G18.8-196.7G21 pg/ml,
P!0.0001  and  19.8G19.7-27.9G17.3 ng/ml,  P!0.01  respectively.  HDL-c
increased (49.5G11.9-54.7G15.1 mg%, P!0.02) while insulin and HOMA
index decreased: 8.9G6.3 vs 8.1G3.8 uU/ml, P!0.02 and 2.14G1.7 vs 1.9G
1.0, P!0.01, respectively. Group MT: T induced an increment in BMI (24.8G
6.1-25.7G5.3, P!0.013), in ratio waist/hip (0.86G0.08-0.89G0.08, P!0.05),
in T (0.44G0.19-5.8G3.1 ng/ml P!0.0001), and in HOMA index (1.69G
1.0-2.37G1.27 P!0.03), while E2 and HDL-c decreased  (6.8G79-65.2G
37.7 pg/ml  P!0.0001
and
59.7G13.6-52.7G12.7
P!0.02,  respectively).
Prolactin remains unchanged (19.3G8.3-17.3G6.8 ng/ml). There were signi-
ficant correlations (Pearson) between the percentage increment of HOMA index
and increment of both waist circunference (r: 0.438, P!0.037) and serum
testosterone (r: 0.559, P!0.03). In this large number of transgender population
treated with similar dosis and drugs, E2 seems to be protective (improvement of
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
insulin-resistance and lipid profile) while T administration to biological women
induced deletereous changes on lipid and insulin-resistance parameters.
These results seems to support the hypothesis that estrogens have beneficial
effects in men and women but the dual action of T (in genetically men and
women) seems to be associated to a gender-specific effect.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP199
EP200
Free triiodothyronine is a predictor factor of left ventricular
remodeling in patients after myocardial infarction and primary
reperfusion assessed by means of two-dimensional speckle tracking
echocardiography
Joanna Wierzbicka-Chmiel2, Artur Chmiel1, Grzegorz Koloczek1,
Grzegorz Pifczyk1, Bogdan Marek3 & Dariusz Kajdaniuk3
1Department of Cardiology, Hospital Rybnik, Rybnik, Poland;2Department
of Endocrinology, Hospital Rybnik, Rybnik, Poland;3Department of
Pathophysiology and Endocrinology, School of Medicine in Zabrze,
Medical University of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland.
Introduction
Left ventricular remodeling (LVR) is the most important consequence of acute
myocardial infarction (AMI). The aim of the study was to assess the value of free
triiodothyronine (fT3) in the prediction of LVR after AMI and primary coronary
angioplasty (PCI).
Methods
Seventy patients (F/MZ17/53, 61G11 years old) without recognized previous
thyroid dysfunction and AMI were enrolled into the prospective observational
study. Conventional and global longitudinal two dimensional speckle tracking
echocardiography (LSTE) were performed 2 days (baseline) and 50 days after
AMI. Thyroid function serum parameters (TSH, fT3, fT4) were measured three
times: before, 2 and 50 days after catheterization. Patients were divided into two
groups according to the change of LSTE at 50 days follow up (increase - I,
decrease - II).
Results
At the baseline, both groups didn’t differ in terms of fT3 concentration (mean
difference 0.13 pg/ml; PZ0.4), left ventricular ejection fraction (54%G9 vs
51%G10; PZ0.2) and global LSTE (K17%G4 vs K15%G4; PZ0.1). The
difference between fT3 level between 2 and 50 days after PCI was a significant
predictor of the change of LSTE (group x time interaction PZ0.015). According
to the ROC analysis the increase of fT3 upper 0.28 pg/ml (sensitivity 69%,
specificity 54%) was the most powerful predictor of the increase of LSTE after
AMI.
Conclusion
The change of fT3 levels are closely associated with early LVR in patients with
AMI and successful interventional treatment, hence might help to distinguish the
patients endangered LVR.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP200
EP201
The dual FXR/TGR5 agonist INT-767 counteracts nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis in a rabbit model of high fat diet-induced metabolic
syndrome
Linda Vignozzi1, Ilaria Cellai1, Sandra Filippi2, Paolo Comeglio1,
Erica Sarchielli3, Annamaria Morelli3, Elena Maneschi1,
Gabriella Barbara Vannelli3, Luciano Adorini4 & Mario Maggi1
1Sexual Medicine and Andrology Unit, Department of Experimental and
Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy;
2Interdepartmental Laboratory of Functional and Cellular Pharmacology of
Reproduction, Department of Neuroscience, Drug Research and Child Care,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy;3Department of Experimental and
Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy;4Intercept
Pharmaceuticals, New York, NY 10011, New York, USA.
Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and Takeda G protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR5) are
interesting pharmacological targets for the treatment of liver and metabolic
diseases. FXR-deficient mice on a high-fat diet (HFD) exhibit massive hepatic
steatosis,  necro-inflammation  and  fibrogenesis.  Moreover,  pharmacological
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
activation of TGR5 in mice promotes protective mechanisms in biliary epithelial
cells and inhibits hepatic and systemic inflammation. Thus, we hypothesized that
a FXR/TGR5 dual agonist (INT-767) would ameliorate features of nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis
(NASH)  in  a  rabbit  model  of  metabolic  syndrome
(MetS).
Treatment with increasing doses of INT-767 (3,10,30 mg/Kg/day for 12 weeks) in
a rabbit model of HFD-induced MetS, characterized also by NASH, dose-
dependently reduced several MetS-associated alterations, including hepatome-
galy, insulin resistance, increase of ALT, glucose, cholesterol levels, while
significantly increasing HDL levels. ALT was positively associated with all MetS
parameters; however introducing all MetS factors in a multivariate analysis, only
total cholesterol levels resulted positively associated with ALT level. High
macrophage M1 pro-inflammatory/M2 anti-inflammatory ratio was observed in
MetS-induced NASH, which was independently associated with serum ALT
levels. HFD-induced increase in M1/M2 ratio was reduced by INT-767 treatment
and  M2  macrophage  markers  were  increased.  Genes  related  to  neutrophil
apoptosis/apoptotic-neutrophil clearance and to extracellular matrix degradation
were also increased by INT-767 treatment. INT-767 also reduced liver expression
of IL-6, which preferentially skews the Th cell response towards a Th17-
phenotype, while increasing Foxp3 expression, a Treg cell marker. These data
indicate  that  INT-767
can  promote  the  neutrophil-  and  macrophage-driven
resolution phase of inflammation and fibrosis regression. In addition, INT-767
increased  genes  related  to  hepatic  fatty  acid  metabolism  and  lipid  droplet
formation,  suggesting  that  INT-767
counteracts  excess  fatty  acid  mediated
lipotoxicity in the liver. Genes related to insulin signaling were also increased by
INT-767.  Finally,  immunohistochemical  studies  demonstrated  that  INT-767
treatment  significantly  reduced  both  HFD-induced  liver  inflammation  and
fibrosis.
In conclusion, INT-767 treatment counteracts NASH in a rabbit model of HFD-
induced MetS by promoting insulin sensitivity, resolution of inflammation and
fibrosis regression.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP201
EP202
Adropin as a potential biomarker of nutrition status and cardiac
function in hemodialyzed patients
Malgorzata Kaluzna, Krzysztof Schwermer, Krzysztof Hoppe,
Magdalena Człapka-Matyasik, Nadia Sawicka-Gutaj, Aisha Yusuf Ibrahim,
Andrzej Minczykowski, Katarzyna Piatek, Krzysztof Pawlaczyk,
Katarzyna Ziemnicka & Marek Ruchala
Poznan University of Medical Science, Poznan´, Poland.
Introduction
Adropin, a newly discovered peptide hormone, seems to have broad implications
in energy homeostasis and metabolism in humans. Its main role is in maintaining
appropriate carbohydrate and lipid economy. However, the aim of this study was
to look at the novel role of adropin as a potential marker for cardiac function and
nutrition status in hemodialyzed (HD) patients. To the best of our knowledge,
this was the first study to consider the relationship between serum adropin
concentration and clinical status of HD patients.
Description of methods/design
The study consisted of 41 HD patients (29 males; median age G53 years).
Adropin levels along with circulating N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide
(NT-proBNP), troponin T (cTnT), albumin (Alb), fasting serum insulin and
glucose levels, insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR), insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1)  and  parameters  of  lipid  economy  were  assessed.  Additionally
anthropometric measurements were taken and echocardiography was performed.
Results
Adropin levels were negatively correlated with: body mass (rZK0.469), BMI
(rZK0.445) and triglycerides (TAG) (rZK0.369). Also there was a significant
relationship between adropin concentration and IGF-1 (rZK0.374). However
adropin levels were not correlated with glucose and insulin levels and HOMA-IR.
Strong positive correlations were observed between adropin level and cTnT
(rZ0.325) as well as NT-proBNP (rZ0.355). Adropin was related to: left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (rZK0.499) and left ventricular systole
(LVS) diameter (rZ0.451). No correlation was found between adropin and blood
pressure.
Conclusion
Adropin seems to be a negative predictor of nutrition in HD patients. The
relationship between adropin and markers of cardiac insufficiency might indicate
a new link between myokines and cardiovascular disease in dialyzed patients.
Adropin could potentially be a new candidate for a marker of cardiac insufficiency
in HD patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP202
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP203
Follicle stimulating hormone levels and subclinical atherosclerosis in
older postmenopausal women
Elizabeth Bertone-Johnson1,2, Jyrki Virtanen2, Tarja Nurmi2,
Jaakko Mursu2, Sari Voutilainen2, Kimmo Ronkainen2, Leo Niskanen3,4,
Jussi Kauhanen2 & Tomi-Pekka Tuomainen2
1Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health and
Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts,
USA;2Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University of
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland;3Department of Endocrinology, Helsinki
University Hospital and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;4Institute
of Clinical Medicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
Objective
Recent  studies  of  perimenopausal  women  suggest  that  follicle  stimulating
hormone (FSH) levels may be associated with atherosclerosis, independent of
actions of estradiol (E2). Whether FSH is related to atherosclerosis in older
postmenopausal women, who have completed the menopausal transition, remains
unknown.
Approach
We assessed the relation of FSH and E2 levels with carotid artery intima-media
thickness
(IMT)  among  588
postmenopausal  women  participating  in  the
prospective  Kuopio  Ischaemic  Heart  Disease
(KIHD)  Risk  Factor  study
(1998-2001). Women were aged 53-73 and not using hormone therapy.
Results
We observed a significant inverse association between FSH levels and IMT. Mean
IMT in quartiles 1-4 of FSH were 0.94, 0.91, 0.87, and 0.85 mm, respectively
(P!0.001). After adjustment for age, E2, testosterone, BMI, lipids, insulin,
glucose, comorbid conditions and other factors, FSH levels remained inversely
and significantly associated with IMT
(Regression coefficients for quartiles
2-4 vs quartile 1: K0.039, K0.050, and K0.063, respectively; P for trendZ0.01).
Findings were strongest in women aged 64-73 (P for trendZ0.005) and did not
vary by category of BMI. In contrast, E2 levels were not related to IMT.
Conclusions
We observed significantly lower IMT in women with the highest FSH levels in
older postmenopausal women. Associations were not explained by E2, adiposity
or other factors. Our findings warrant replication and the further exploration of
potential underlying mechanisms.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP203
EP204
Testosterone supplementation and body composition: results from a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Giovanni Corona1, Vito A Giagulli2, Elisa Maseroli3, Linda Vignozzi3,
Antonio Aversa4,5, Michael Zitzmann6, Farid Saad7 & Mario Maggi3
1Endocrinology Unit, Medical Department, Azienda Usl Bologna
Maggiore-Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy;2Unit of Metabolic Diseases
and Endocrinology, Conversano, Italy;3Andrology and Sexual Medicine
Unit, Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy;4Department of Experimental
Medicine Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy;5Department of
Experimental MDepartment of Experimental and Clinical Medicine,
University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy;6Centre for Reproductive
Medicine and Andrology, Munster, Germany;7Bayer Pharma, Global
Medical Affairs Andrology, Berlin, Germany.
Background
The role of testosterone (T) in regulating body composition is conflicting.
Aim
To meta-analyze the effects of T supplementation (TS) on body composition and
metabolic outcomes.
Methods
All randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing the effect of TS on different
endpoints were considered.
Results
Overall, 59 trials were included in the study enrolling 3029 and 2049 patients in
TS and control groups, respectively. TS was associated with any significant
modification of body weight, waist circumference and BMI. Conversely, TS was
associated with a significant reduction of fat and with an increase of lean mass
(standardized means K0.32 (K0.44; K0.19) and 0.51 (0.37; 0.66) for fat and
lean mass, respectively; both P!0.0001) as well as with a reduction of fasting
glycaemia and insulin resistance
(K0.34 (K0.51; K0.17) mM and K0.80
(K1.16; K0.45) for fasting glycemia and HOMA index, respectively; both
P!0.0001).  The  effect  on  fasting  glycaemia  was  even  higher  in  younger
individuals and in those with metabolic diseases. When only RCTs enrolling
hypogonadal (total T!12 moles/l) subjects were considered, a reduction of total
cholesterol as well as of triglyceride levels were also detected. Conversely, an
improvement in HDL cholesterol levels as well as in both systolic and diastolic
blood pressure was not observed.
Conclusions
Our data suggest that TS is able to improve body composition and glycometabolic
profile particularly in younger subjects and in those with metabolic disturbances.
Specifically designed studies are urgently needed to confirm this point.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP204
EP205
Effects of sex steroids on cardiovascular risk profile in female to male
transsexuals with cross-sex hormone treatment
Gloria Aranda Velazquez1,2, Mireia Mora Porta1,2, Felicia
Alexandra Hanzu1,2, Josep Vera2, Emilio Ortega1,2 & Irene Halperin1,2
1Endocrinology Department, HCB, Barcelona, Spain;
2IDIBAPS - CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction
In  transsexualism,  cross-sex  hormone  treatment
(CHT)  both  improves  and
impairs several surrogate cardiovascular risk markers in female to male (FtoM).
Few randomized trials on CHT with long follow-up and control group are
available, and present evidence is inconsistent. We here assess changes in
metabolic and cardiovascular risk after 12 months CHT compared with biological
sex in FtoM GID.
Methods
Prospective observational study, including 20 FtoM GID, attended in the Gender
Identity Disorder Unit (UTIG) of Hospital Clinic from July 2012 to November
2013, who accepted to participate. CHT in FtoM consisted of intramuscular
testosterone undecanoate
(1000 mg every 2-3 months) except for one who
received transdermal testosterone (50 mg/day). Contraindications for CHT were
ruled out; subjects had not previously received hormonal treatment, and had no
history of cardiovascular disease or HIV. Anthropometric and body composition
by DEXA, hormonal, metabolic and coagulation parameters were assessed at
baseline, and at 6 and 12 months of CHT. Also endothelial dysfunction was
evaluated by flow-mediated dilation (FMD) and Intima-media thickness (IMT) by
carotid ultrasound at baseline, 6 and 12 months.
Results
Changes after 6 and 12 moths of CHT: anthropometry and body composition:
increased BMI (P: 0.001), decreased total fat mass (P: 0.050), increased total lean
mass (P: 0.007) and decreased ginecoid fat distribution (P: 0.008) Hormonal:
decreased  LH
(P:
0.008),  SHBG
(P!0.001)  and  increased  testosterone
(P!0.001).
Metabolism
Increased total cholesterol (P: 0.043), LDL (P: 0.019) and triglycerides (P: 0.001),
and decreased HDL (P: 0.035); increased homocysteine (P: 0.003) and leucocytes
(P:! 0.001).
Coagulation
Increased hemoglobin (P!0.001) and hematocrit (P!0.001) and decreased
platelets (P: 0.011). No changes in FMD or IMT were observed.
Conclusion
CHT in FtoM has negative effects in the metabolic profile in the first 12 months of
treatment which could be associated to an increase the cardiovascular risk.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP205
EP206
Circadian clock expression in hypothyroid male Wistar rats
Rodrigo A Peliciari-Garcia1,2, Paula Bargi-Souza1, Rafael M Prévide1,
Martin E Young3 & Maria Tereza Nunes1
1Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, Sa˜o Paulo, SP,
Brazil;2Department of Biological Sciences, Federal University of São
Paulo, Diadema, SP, Brazil;3Division of Cardiovascular Disease,
Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
Both metabolism and cardiac function fluctuate over the course of the day
according to energy supply and demand. The triiodothyronine (T3) regulates
several genes related to metabolism and function in cardiomyocytes. Our previous
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
data  have  suggested  that  there  is  a  potential  interrelationship  between  the
regulation of cardiac function by T3 and the intrinsic circadian clock in the heart.
Considering that: i) the hypothyroidism is associated to a reduction on cardiac
function, presenting lower frequency and duration of ventricular contraction and,
ii) the oscillation in the circulating levels of T3 during the 24 h are changed in this
pathological condition, the purpose of the present study was to investigate the
expression of clock genes and clock-controlled genes related to the cardiac
metabolism and contraction in hypothyroid adult animals. For this, euthyroid and
thyroidectomized male Wistar rats were euthanized every 3 h during 24 h. The
hearts were excised and the mRNA expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR using
cyclophilin as a housekeeping gene. One and two-way ANOVA, as well as,
Cosinor analysis were used to evaluate the time-of-day-dependent differential
expression  for  each  gene/group  and  their  interactions.  In  general,  the
hypothyroidism reduced the expression of Pdk4, at dark phase - ZT15, and
Ucp3, at light phase - ZT2 and 9. No significant changes were noticed in Bmal1,
Per2, Dbp and Rora expression throughout the whole investigated period. Our
study shows that in the hypothyroidism there are punctual changes in the content
of transcripts related to the cardiac metabolism and function but the expression of
core-clock genes are preserved. These results corroborate with our previous
investigation showing that T3 actions in the heart seem to be independent of the
clock, acting in specific target pathways like pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase and
mitochondrial electron transport chain, which in turn can alter heart metabolism
and function.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP206
EP207
Moderate cross-sex hormone-induced prothrombotic changes of
hemostatic variables in transgender subjects
Nienke Selier1, Suzanne Cannegieter2, Annemarie Venemans-Jellema2 &
Martin den Heijer1
1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;2The Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Context
Little research has been performed on hemostatic changes in transgender subjects
receiving cross-sex hormone treatment (CSHT), despite the fact that several
studies implicate an increased risk of venous thrombosis (VT) associated with
hormones.
Objective
Assessing whether coagulation is relevantly influenced by prolonged CSHT,
stratified for the different treatment modalities, in transgenders.
Design and main outcome
Prospective  study  on  CSHT-induced  changes  of  hemostatic  variables  in
transgenders. The main outcome measures were mean paired differences in
factor II, IX and XI, protein C and S, fibrinogen, and activated protein C
resistance (APCR) over a period of 12 months of CSHT.
Participants
Eighty two subjects were included, of which 41 male-to-female (MtF) and
41 female-to-male (FtM), who used CSHT for 12 months.
Intervention
Oral or transdermal 17b-estradiol, combined with cyproterone acetate, in MtFs
and testosterone gel or injections in FtMs.
Results
In MtFs, protein C decreased on average by 0.078 U/ml (95% CI 0.042,0.111),
while factor IX and XI increased by 0.152 (95% CI K0.235, K0.069) and
0.148 U/ml (95%CI K0.214, K0.082), respectively. No change was observed in
the other factors. No difference in changes between the treatment modalities was
observed. Conversely, FtMs only experienced an average increase of 0.104 U/ml
(95% CI K0.215, 0.007) in factor IX. None of the other investigated factors
showed any change in this group. Several factors changed differently for the
treatment  modalities.  The results will be extended  with more  patients and
hemostatic variables (APCR, TFPI). The complete set of results will be analyzed
for the role of treatment modality, age and other relevant factors in these changes.
Conclusions
CSHT induces relevant prothrombotic changes in multiple hemostatic factors in
MtFs. In FtMs, no clear effect of CSHT was observed. The change in some
variables is modified by the different treatment modalities in FtMs, but not in
MtFs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP207
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP208
Optimising human hepatocyte models for metabolic phenotype: effects
of treatment with DMSO
Nikolaos Nikolaou, Charlotte Green, Pippa Gunn, Leanne Hodson &
Jeremy Tomlinson
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Primary  human  hepatocytes  are  considered  the
‘gold  standard’  to  explore
metabolic phenotype within the liver, however they come with limitations, such
as donor variability, lack of proliferation and rapid phenotype loss. The human
hepatoma cell line, HepG2, has been used extensively in cell-based metabolic
studies but there are significant limitations including their malignant origin and
inherent low rates of triglyceride secretion. The aim of this study was to
investigate whether dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) supplementation in the cell
media could enhance HepG2 cell metabolic functionality leading to development
of an  improved model that  may  more  closely  resemble primary  human
hepatocytes. HepG2 cells were cultured in cell media containing 1% DMSO
for
7,
14,  and
21
days  and  gene  expression,  protein  levels,  intracellular
triglyceride content and triglyceride, urea and 3-OH-butyrate concentrations in
the cell medium measured. mRNA expression of four markers of hepatocyte
differentiation (albumin, HNF4A, transthyretin and a1-antithrypsin) increased
with DMSO treatment to levels that were similar to those seen in primary cultures
of human hepatocytes. In addition, mRNA expression of the tumor marker alpha-
fetoprotein decreased. Furthermore, DMSO treatment decreased intracellular
triglyceride  content
(controlZ205.1G16.1 nmol/mg,  day
7Z83.8G
9.0 nmol/mg,  day
14Z82.3G10.5 nmol/mg,  day
21Z83.9G5.1 nmol/mg),
while media triglyceride and 3-OH-butyrate levels increased in a time-dependent
manner (TG: controlZ2.5G0.3 nmol/mg, day 7Z1.4G0.1 nmol/mg, day 14Z
5.0G1.2 nmol/mg, day 21Z6.2G2.0 nmol/mg; 3-OH-butyrate: controlZ4.5G
2.3 mmol/mg,  day  7Z12.3G0.8 mmol/mg,  day  14Z12.1G0.8 mmol/mg,  day
21Z9.0G1.1 mmol/mg). Urea levels remained unchanged. Moreover, DMSO
treatment decreased the mRNA expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism
(ACC1, ACC2, DGAT1, DGAT2, FAS, SCD), but increased the levels of those
implicated  in  glucose  metabolism
(PEPCK,  G6PC).  Changes  in  mRNA
expression were mirrored by changes at the protein level as measured by western
blotting. We have demonstrated that DMSO treatment changes the metabolic
phenotype of HepG2 cells such that they more closely resemble primary human
hepatocytes and has the potential to signficantly enhance currently available cell
systems to study liver biology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP208
EP209
Turner’s syndrome and liver involvement: prevalence and
characterization of a large population with Turner’s syndrome
Matilde Calanchini1,3, Ahmad Moolla1, Jeremy W Tomlinson1,
Jeremy Cobbold2, Andrea Fabbri3, Ashley Grossman1 & Helen Turner1
1Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK;2Translational Gastroenterology
Unit, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, John Radcliffe
Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK;3Endocrinology Unit,
Department of Systems Medicine, S. Eugenio and CTO A. Alesini
Hospitals, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
Introduction
Elevated liver function tests ([LFTs) are frequent in Turner’s syndrome (TS),
with  a  prevalence  between
20
and
80%,  and  increases  with  age.  Their
pathogenesis and clinical significance is unclear.
Objectives
To  study  the  prevalence  of
[LFTs  and  their  relationship  with  karyotype,
anthropometric, metabolic and TS-related conditions: 68 TS women, average age
39 years (range 18-61 years), were reviewed.
Results
Twenty six women (38%) had one or more liver enzymes persistently raised
(duration 5.6 yearsG3.8 S.D.), with the most frequently elevated enzyme being
GGT in 92% of cases, and ALT, ALP and AST in 77, 69 and 38%, respectively.
Hepatitis serology and autoimmune-markers were negative, bilirubin was normal
and no reported alcohol consumption in all. In the normal-LFTs-group no past
history of [LFTs was noted.
There  was  no  association  between
[LFTs  and  anthropometric  values
(height/weight/BMI), diabetes,  HbA1c,  renal  or  cardiac  malformations,  and
either GH or oestrogen therapy. The prevalence of spontaneous menstruation was
higher in the normal-LFTs-group. Age was significantly higher in the [LFTs-
group (42.5 yearG13.1 S.D. vs 34.9 yearG12.4 S.D., PZ0.01). 48% of patients
with [LFTs had a karyotype 45,X0 vs 32.5% in the normal-LFs-group. The
frequency of hypertension, dyslipidaemia and thyroid autoimmunity was higher
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
in the [LFTs-group (35% vs 14%, 23% vs 7% and 27% vs 17%, respectively).
Abdominal-ultrasonography was normal in ten cases, suggestive of NAFLD (non-
alcoholic-fatty-liver-disease)  in  four  and  in  one  showed  nodularity  and
hepatosplenomegaly. Two patients had a normal Fibroscan and one a normal
MRCP. Liver biopsy was performed in three patients: one normal, one NAFLD
and one showed chronic hepatitis.
Conclusions
This study confirms that the prevalence of [LFTs increases with age, that an
adequate oestrogen milieu may be protective, and HRT does not need to be
discontinued in the presence of [LFTs. It suggests that [LFTs may be commoner
in  TS  patients  with
45,X0,  and/or  hypertension,  hyperlipidaemia  and
autoimmunity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP209
EP210
Natural history and metabolic implications of the new hormone
fibroblast growth factor 21 in uremic patients on peritoneal dialysis
Juan J Díez1, Elena González2, María Auxiliadora Bajo2, Gloria Del Peso2,
Cristina Grande3, Olaia Rodríguez3, Mariana Díaz-Almirón4,
Pedro Iglesiaas1 & Rafael Selgas2
1Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal,
Madrid, Spain;2Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain;3Department of Biochemistry, Hospital Universitario La
Paz, Madrid, Spain;4Department of Biostatistics, Hospital Universitario La
Paz, Madrid, Spain.
Background
Human fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is a new liver hormone that stimulate
adipocyte glucose uptake and is involved in regulation of body fat.
Objective
To define the natural history of FGF21 in peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients and
analyze  its  relationship  with  glucose  metabolism,  peritoneal  function,  and
residual renal function (RRF).
Methods
We studied 48 uremic patients undergoing PD. Patients were evaluated at
baseline, and 1, 2 and 3 years after starting PD. At each evaluation, clinical status,
biochemical parameters (including FGF21, glucose, insulin, homeostatic model
assessment of insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) and non-esterified fatty acids
concentration (NEFA)), and peritoneal function parameters were assessed.
Results
Plasma FGF21 concentrations significantly increased over the first year and
maintained at high levels during the rest of the study period, especially among
non-diabetic patients (nZ37, baseline 253 (59-685) vs 647 (121-1117) pg/ml at
third year, P!0.01). In non-diabetic patients glucose levels did not modify,
whereas HOMA-IR showed a significant reduction at second year (1.96 (1.23-
4.15) vs 1.65 (0.79-2.86), P!0.01). Baseline FGF21 concentrations significantly
correlated with RRF (rZK0.484, P!0.05) and peritoneal protein losses (PPL,
rZ0.410,  P!0.05).  Using  a  mixed  model  analysis,  we  found  a  positive
correlation between time on dialysis and FGF21 levels (P!0.001). There was no
association between FGF21 levels and age, body mass index, HOMA-IR, NEFA,
glucose, glucose load from PD solutions, and peritoneal mass transfer coefficients
of urea and creatinine. Patients with RRF had significantly (P!0.05) lower levels
of FGF21 than those without it, and there was a significant positive association
between FGF21 levels and PPL (P!0.05), independently of the time on dialysis.
Conclusion
FGF21 plasma levels importantly increase during PD therapy. This increment is
associated with RRF and PPL. The absence of increment in insulin resistance in
spite of maintained peritoneal glucose load suggests that FGF-21 might behave as
a protective factor against insulin resistance.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP210
EP211
Impact of a specific risk factors unit intervention on clinical outcomes in
patients with type 2 diabetes after myocardial infarction
Manuel Cayón Blanco, Carolina García-Figueras Mateos & Ana del
Río Lechuga
Hospital SAS Jerez de la Frontera, Jerez de la Frontera, Spain.
Introduction
In our setting, it is quite common that control of major risk factors of patients with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) after myocardial infarction (MI) is not made by specific risk
factors units (SRFU). Here, we conducted a preliminary study to investigate the
effects of a SRFU intervention on metabolic and cardiovascular outcomes in T2D
patients who suffered from MI.
Methods/design
This retrospective and observational study was performed in one single centre.
Data related to metabolic and cardiologic variables were collected at discharge
and at 6 and 12 months of follow-up. Variables were compared according to
whether risk factors control  was made by SRFU or other specialties after
discharge.
Results
Data from forty-eight patients (mean age: 70.6G8.7 years; 47.9% females) were
collected. 27.5% were referred to SRFU after discharge. Antidiabetic treatment
was changed in 48.7%. Among patients whose treatment was changed, add-on
strategy was the most used way to switch it (63.2%). Patients referred to SRFU
were more likely to undergo changes in treatment (81.8% vs 35.7%; PZ0.01).
A1C reductions were higher among patients under SRFU control at 6 and 1 year
(K0.74% vs K0.69% and K0.92% vs K0.65%, respectively). Also, rates of new
hospitalizations due to heart failure at 6 and 12 months (18.2% vs 21%; 0% vs
5.5%) and mortality by any cause (0% vs 13%; 0% vs 5.5%), were lower in SRFU
group. Nevertheless, non-significant differences were observed between groups.
Conclusions
Our results show a non-significant trend toward to improvement of metabolic and
cardiovascular outcomes among patients that were referred to SRFU after MI.
These differences were more remarkable when follow-up time was longer.
Though further studies with a larger number of patients are ongoing in our
Hospital, we conclude that referrals to a SRFU should be recommended in these
patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP211
EP212
Which are the male factors associated with female sexual dysfunction
(FSD)?
Elisa Maseroli1, Egidia Fanni1, Edoardo Mannucci2,
Massimiliano Fambrini3, Emmanuele A Jannini4, Mario Maggi1 &
Linda Vignozzi1
1Sexual Medicine and Andrology Unit, Department of Experimental,
Clinical and Biomedical Sciences ‘Mario Serio’, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy;2Diabetes Agency, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy;
3Gynecology and Obstetrics Unit, Department of Experimental, Clinical and
Biomedical Sciences ‘Mario Serio’, University of Florence, Florence, Italy;
4Department of Systems Medicine, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.
It has been generally assumed that partner’s erectile dysfunction (ED), premature
(PE) and delayed ejaculation (DE) play a significant role in determining Female
sexual dysfunction (FSD). The present study aimed to evaluate the role of
perceived  male  partner’s  sexual  function  and  of  the  referred  quality  of
relationship in determining FSD. A consecutive series of
156 heterosexual
women consulting our outpatient clinic for FSD between January and December
2014 was retrospectively studied. All patients underwent a structured interview
and filled out the Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI).
No  significant  association  was  observed  between  FSFI  total  score  and
cardiovascular risk factors or investigated metabolic parameters. When relational
parameters were evaluated, FSFI total score decreased as a function of partner’s
age, conflicts within the couple, a relationship without cohabitation and the habit
of engaging in intercourse to please the partner (P!0.05); FSFI total score
increased as a function of frequency of intercourse, attempts to conceive and
fertility-focused intercourse
(P!0.05). FSFI total score showed a negative,
stepwise correlation with partner’s perceived hypoactive sexual desire (HSD)
(rZK0.327; P!0.0001), whereas no significant correlation was found between
FSFI and ED, PE or DE. In an age-adjusted model, partner’s HSD was negatively
related to FSFI total score (WaldZ9.196, PZ0.002), and arousal (WaldZ7.893,
PZ0.005), lubrication (WaldZ5.042, PZ0.025), orgasm (WaldZ9.293, PZ0.002),
satisfaction
(WaldZ12.764,  P!0.0001)  and  pain
(WaldZ6.492,  PZ0.011)
domains. Partner’s HSD was also significantly associated with somatized anxiety,
low frequency of intercourse, low partner’s care for the patient’s sexual pleasure
and with a higher frequency of masturbation, even after adjusting for age
(P!0.05). In patients not reporting any HSD, FSFI total score was significantly
lower when their partner’s libido was low (PZ0.041); the correlation disappeared
if the patient also experienced HSD.
In conclusion, the partner’s performance during sexual intercourse, in terms of
erectile function and ejaculatory times, does not seem to act as a primary
contributing factor to FSD, as determined by FSFI scores; conversely, women’s
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
sexuality seems to be mostly impaired by the perceived reduction of their
partner’s sexual interest.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP212
EP213
Aerobic exercise increases catalase activity and decreased levels of
leptin and TNFa in patients with liver disease
Francisco Javier Vílchez-López1, Marta Rivas-Rivas2, Isabel Mateo-
Gavira1, Claudio Rodríguez-Ramos3 & Manuel Romero-Gómez4
1Endocrinology, Puerta del Mar Hospital, Cádiz, Spain;2Digestive, Puerto
Real Hospital, Cádiz, Spain;3Digestive, Puerta del Mar Hospital, Cádiz,
Spain;4Digestive, Valme Hospital and Ciberehd, Sevilla, Spain.
Introduction
Both insulin resistance and oxidative stress are implicated in the pathophysiology
of various diseases such as type 2 diabetes mellitus, atherosclerosis or liver
disease. Furthermore, the uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1) is involved in induced
thermogenesis, related to the pathogenesis of obesity and diabetes. The aim of this
study was to assess the impact of aerobic exercise on the inflammatory profile in
patients with chronic hepatitis C.
Methods
We designed an experimental prospective (before-after) study that included
patients with chronic hepatitis C and insulin resistance but without associated
metabolic  syndrome.  An  individualized  program  of  aerobic  exercise
(three
sessions of 60-min/week) for 16 weeks was designed. Variables were determined
(antioxidant markers and adipokines) before and after the intervention. Serum
leptin and TNF-alpha concentrations were measured using commercial kits for
ELISA  (Immunotech,  Coulter  Corp.,  Westbrook,  MA,  USA).  The  catalase
activity was inflammatory cytokines monitored with a commercial kit (Cayman
Chemicals, Michigan USA).
Results
A total of 34 patients were included. The mean age was 46.8G5 years and 22
were male (65%). The mean baseline BMI was 25.7G3.5 kg/m2  and excess
weight of 6.17G6.67 kg. Adherence to the exercise program was 88%. After 16
weeks of the exercise program, a significant increase in catalase enzyme levels
(20.37G1.32 vs 27.33G1.94 mmol/minK1 per ml, PZ0.005) and a decrease of
leptin
(14 500
vs
11 500 pg/ml,  P!0.05)  and  TNFa  (0.65
vs
0.05 pg/ml,
P!0.05)  levels  were  detected.  On  the  other  hand,  the concentration  of
uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1) showed a statistically significant increase after
exercise (305.2 vs 510.5, P!0.05).
Conclusion
In our series, the prescription of an individualized aerobic exercise program,
controlled  and  monitored  for
16
weeks,  improved  antioxidant  status  and
decreased levels of proinflammatory cytokines and adipokines in patients with
chronic liver disease and insulin resistance.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP213
EP214
Impact of overweight and obesity on cardiac diastolic function
Neslihan Soysal Atile1, Derya Baykız2, Betul Ekiz Bilir1 & Bulent Bilir3
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Tekirdag State Hospital,
Tekirdag, Turkey;2Department of Cardiology, Tekirdag State Hospital,
Tekirdag, Turkey;3Department of Internal Medicine, Namik Kemal
University Faculty of Medicine, Tekirdag, Turkey.
Introduction
Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction (LVDD) is a common cause of heart failure
in obese patients. The aim of this study is to evaluate diastolic function and its
relation to body mass index (BMI) in overweight and obese patients by using
transthoracic echocardiography.
Material and method
A total of 133 cases were enrolled in the study. All anthropometric and laboratory
measures  were  recorded.  After  measuring  two-dimensional  and  M-mode
echocardiographic variables, left and right ventricle diastolic functions were
evaluated by conventional and tissue Doppler imaging. The patients with diabetes
mellitus, hypertension and any kind of cardiovascular disease were excluded from
the study.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
BMI was positively correlated with systolic and diastolic blood pressures and
laboratory measures of HOMA-IR, low density lipoprotein (LDL) and proBNP.
BMI was positively correlated with left atrium (LA) and left ventricul (LV) end-
diastolic, end-systolic diameters, thickness of the wall of the LV, LA volume
indices  and  LV  mass  indices
(PZ0.000).  When  tissue  Doppler  diastolic
parameters were evaluated for right and left ventricul; BMI was negatively
correlated with mitral septal annulus E’ (PZ0.022), and positively correlated
with  LV  end-diastolic  filling  index  E/e’
(PZ0.005),  tricuspid  annulus  E’
(PZ0.049), tricuspid annulus A’ (PZ0.006), tricuspid annulus peak myocardial
systolic velocity (Sa) (PZ0,004). Pro-BNP was negatively correlated with mitral
annulus E’ (PZ0.007) and positively correlated with left atrium and ventricular
diameters
(PZ0.027
and
0.008
respectively),  left  atrium  volume  index
(PZ0.000) and E/e’ (PZ0.029).
Conclusion
Overweight and obesity have a negative impact on diastolic function as assessed
by tissue Doppler imaging. Positive correlation between BMI and pro-BNP levels
may call attention to potential value of pro-BNP as a marker of diastolic
dysfunction.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP214
EP215
TNF related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) reduces reactive
oxygen species production by human aortic endothelial cells exposed to
inflammatory stimuli
Hannah Forde1,2, Colin Davenport1,2, Keith Rochfort2, Philip Cummins2 &
Diarmuid Smith1
1Beaumont Hospital and RCSI Medical School, Dublin, Ireland;2Dublin
City Universtiy, Dublin, Ireland.
Introduction
Accumulating evidence suggests that one of the most significant contributors to
endothelial dysfunction is increased oxidative stress. Excessive reactive oxygen
species
(ROS) generation can have injurious effects within the vasculature
including elevated expression of adhesion molecules, stimulation of vascular
smooth muscle cell proliferation, and promotion of endothelial cell apoptosis;
events which culminate in the formation and progression of atherosclerotic
plaque. Tumour necrosis factor related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL), a
member of the tumour necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily, has been shown to
exhibit anti-atherosclerotic properties in animal studies. Preliminary studies from
our own group, indicate that under pro-atherogenic oscillatory flow, TRAIL
treatment of human aortic endothelial cells (HAECs) can shift net gene expression
toward an ‘atheroprotected’ phenotype by up-regulating anti-oxidant genes. The
aim of this study therefore was to confirm the anti-oxidant potential of TRAIL at a
functional  level,  by  investigating  the  effect  of  TRAIL  on  TNF-a  and
hyperglycaemia induced ROS production.
Methods
Primary human-derived HAECs were cultured in six-well plates and exposed to
pro-oxidant conditions (TNF-a 100 ng/ml or Glucose 30 mmol, 24 h), in the
presence and absence of Recombinant TRAIL (100 ng/ml, 24 h). Flow cytometry
using dihydroethidium staining was utilised to measure ROS.
Results
TNF-a  and  hyperglycaemia  significantly  increased  ROS  production  from
HAECs, whilst TRAIL alone had no effect on ROS production. When co-cultured
with TNF-a however, TRAIL significantly attenuated TNF-a induced ROS
release (nZ3, P!0.05). TRAIL also significantly attenuated hyperglycaemia
induced ROS release (nZ3, P!0.05).
Conclusion
TRAIL  may  impart  protective  effects  on the  vascular  endothelium,  in-part
through reduction of oxidative stress. Though the anti-oxidant mechanism is
unclear, this effect does not appear to be mediated by TNF-a antagonism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP215
EP216
Primary aldosteronism and pregnancy
Tomas Zelinka & Jiri Widimsky Jr
3rd Department of Medicine - Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and
General University Hospital, Praha, Czech Republic.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Primary aldosteronism (PA) may present in younger age and it may so complicate
pregnancy if not diagnosed early. Our aim was to identify patients in whom PA
was diagnosed after pregnancy and to seek for possible complications during
pregnancy.
Design of methods
Retrospective analysis of patients with PA.
Results
We found nine patients with PA (age at diagnosis 31.9G5 years, hypertension
duration
5.9G2.6 years) suffering from hypertension 2.6G1.6 years before
pregnancy (two patients had hypertension diagnosed during pregnancy). In seven
cases,  pregnancy  was  terminated  with  caesarean  section  and  two  patients
delivered spontaneously. Preterm delivery occurred in three cases - the earliest
one in the sixth month. In six cases, diagnosis of preeclampsia was made.
Subsequent diagnosis of PA (sometimes with a long delay (12 years)) was made
on the basis of significantly low potassium values (two subjects suffered even
from hypokalemic paralysis) and hypertension, elevated plasma/serum aldoster-
one  and  suppressed  plasma  renin  activity  or  plasma  renin.  Eight  subjects
underwent laparoscopic adrenalectomy (in all cases, diagnosis of a cortical
adenoma was made) and the last subjects was classified with bilateral hyperplasia
according adrenal venous sampling. Operation normalized blood pressure in six
subjects and improved significantly blood pressure control in remaining two
subjects. One patient became pregnant after adrenalectomy and her pregnancy
went uneventful.
Conclusion
The most frequent pregnancy-related complication of PA is preeclampsia. The
best prevention of these complications is only early diagnosis of PA, in these
particular hypertensive cases the awareness of hypokalemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP216
EP217
Hypertension in young patients: at what age should we explore?
Molka Tougorti, Fatma Chaker, Mariem Yazidi, Ines Cherif,
Malika Chihaoui, Ons Rejeb & Hedia Slimane
Department of Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Rabta Hospital, Tunis,
Tunisia.
Introduction
Secondary high blood pressure is commonly diagnosed in young patients. In
recent years, hypertension is increasing as well as the other components of
metabolic syndrome such as obesity. The aim of this study was to determine the
etiology  of  hypertension  in  patients  aged
!40  years  old  admitted  in  an
endocrinology department.
Materials and methods
It was a retrospective study including 55 patients !40 years old hospitalized at
the endocrinology department between 2003 and 2015 for exploration of a high
blood pressure. Patients with cardiac or known renal failure were not enrolled.
Epidemiological characteristics, clinical signs of secondary hypertension and
biological data were recorded.
Results
The mean age at diagnosis of hypertension was 27.7G7.4 years. Sex ratio (M/F)
was 1.2. The mean duration of hypertension was 25.2G43.1 months. 56.1% of
patients had severe hypertension. There was a family history of hypertension in
72.7% of cases. Twenty percent patients had prediabetes or diabetes, 30.9% had
dyslipemia and 81.8% had overweight. The triad of pheochromocytoma was
observed in 18.1%. Cushing syndrome clinical signs were observed in 12.7%.
Endocrine causes of hypertension were found in 25.5%: Cushing syndrome in
5.5%, pheochromocytoma in 5.5%, primary hyperaldosteronism in 14.5% (six
cases of Conn syndrome and two cases of adrenal hyperplasia) and secondary
hyperaldosteronism in 3.6%: One patient had an hypoplasia of thoracic aorta.
Renal artery ultrasound was performed in 47.2% of cases. No renal artery stenosis
was observed. The etiology of hypertension remained unknown in 70.9% of cases.
The rate of secondary hypertension was no different between patients with
overweight and those without overwieight (PZ0.11).
Conclusion
Prevalence  of  secondary  hypertension  in  our  study  was
29.1%.  Primary
hyperaldosteronism was the most frequent cause. Obesity should not dispense
from the exploration of secondary hypertension in youth population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP217
EP218
Comparison low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels calcutation using
the novel method by Martin vs the Friedewald equation in type 2
diabetic patients
Sequeira Duarte1 & Jorge Azinheira2
1CHLO - Endocrinology, Lisbon, Portugal;2CHLO - Clinical Pathology,
Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) is usualy estimated using the Friedewald equation. This
equation assumes a fixed factor of 5 for the ratio of triglycerides to very LPL
cholesterol
(TG:VLDL-C);  however,  the  actual  TG:VLDL-C  ratio  varies
significantly across the range of triglyceride and cholesterol levels. A new
method was proposed by Martin, S and co-workers using NHANES data. We
aimed to evaluate the concordance Friedewald formula with the new method for
LDL-C estimation from the standard lipid profile using an adjustable factor for the
TG:VLDL-C ratio.
Design and settings
We used the results of consecutive clinical lipid profiles obtained from 2000
through 2015 from 40 339 patients of our outpatient clinic, at our hospital lab. The
measurements were done mainly in type 2 diabetic - 66.1%. Females were 52% of
cases  cholesterol  concentrations  were  directly  measured  after  vertical  spin
density. LDL-C was measured if tryglicerides over 400 mg/dl and calculated by
Friedewald formula if lower. Data were analysed in SPSS package v20.
Results
Diabetic patients had lower LCL-C levels than non diabetics (92 vs 101 mg/dl -
P!0.001). Results of LCL-C are highly correlated in the all lipid profiles (93%
P!0.001) but mean values are 108.3 vs 96.4 mg/dl using Friedewald formula vs
the new method. Wilcokson rank test find significant differences between the
2 methods (P!0.001).
Conclusions and relevance
This  novel  method  to  estimate  LDL-C  using  an  adjustable  factor  for  the
TG:VLDL-C  ratio  produces  significant  lower  values  of  LDL-C  than  the
Friedewald equation. These findings require external validation, as well as
assessment of their clinical importance. The implementation of the new method
into clinical practice is particular relevant when triglycerides are higher than
400 mg/dl.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP218
EP219
The relationship between non-high density lipoprotein cholesterol and
insuline resistance in obese patients
Melih Macit1, Meral Mert3, Ramazan Ates1, Ozlem Polat1 &
Sadik Sami Hatipoglu2
1Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educational and Research Hospital, Family
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educational and
Research Hospital, Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey;3Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk
Educational and Research Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Correction of  Insulin resistance
(IR)  and  dyslipidemic  conditions of  obese
patients is important for the prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD). The aim
of our study is to determine the relationship between IR and non-high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (non-HDL-C) in obese patients.
Material and methods
248 patients over the age of eighteen, non-pregnant, followed with a diagnosis of
obesity but did not receive the treatment of metformin and statin are investigated
retrospectively.  Fasting  glucose
(FG),  HbA1c,  insulin,  homeostasis  model
assessment  of  IR
(HOMA-IR),  LDL-C,  triglycerides
(TG),  HDL-C,  total
cholesterol (TC) and non-HDL-C parameters of these patients were evaluated.
Results
Totally 248 patients (35 male (14.1%) - 213 female (85.9%) were included to
study. When male and female patients are compared, significant differences were
observed only for the parameters of HDL-C and TG (P!0.05). While it is found
that HDL-C is higher in female group, TG is higher in male group. Intra-group
comparisons reveal that there is a highly significant correlation between HOMA-
IR and HDL-C (P!0.01). It is also observed that HOMA-IR and TG are highly
correlated with each other among women (P!0.01). Among women it is also
found that non-HDL-C is highly correlated both with FG and HbA1c (P!0.01).
Conclusion
When HOMA-IR as insulin resistance marker was found related with HDL-C and
TG in women, the absence of this relation in men may be due to number
of  patients.  However,  the  absence  of  correlation  between  HOMA-IR  and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
non-HDL-C in male and female patients may be because of a more strong
relationship between HOMA-IR and TG in early period. In addition to this, during
this period the fact that non-HDL-C is highly correlated with both HbA1c and FG
level may suggest that the importance of non-HDL-C in prediabetes and diabetes
stages may increase.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP219
EP220
Comparison of serum thyroid stimulating hormone and anti-thyroid
peroxidase antibody levels in euthyroid subjects with and without
metabolic syndrome
Sibel Ocak Serin1, Hakan Kocoglu2, Yildiz Okuturlar2, Hakan Dogan3,
Asuman Gedikbasi2, Irem Kirac Utku2, Esra Demir2, Ezgi Ersoy Yesil1,
Guven Koc1, Tulay Eyupgiller1, Sema Ucak1 & Ozlem Harmankaya2
1Umraniye Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;2Bakirkoy
Dr Sadi Konuk Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;3Izmir
Bozyaka Education and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
Objective
The present study aimed to evaluate thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels
and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies (anti-TPOab) in euthyroid subjects with
metabolic syndrome (MetS) and to compare them with healthy subjects without
MetS.
Design
Study included 173 subjects consisted of 96 subjects with MetS and 77 healthy
controls. Gender, age, body mass index (BMI), waist circumfrence (WC), and
detailed medical history of all participants were noted. Serum insulin, glucose,
‘Homeostatic  Model  Assessment-  Insulin  Resistance’
(HOMA-IR),  total
cholesterol
(TC-HOL),  low  density  lipoprotein
(LDL-CHOL),  high  density
lipoprotein
(HDL-CHOL), triglyceride (TG), TSH, free T4, and anti-TPOab
levels were obtained.
Results
TSH and anti-TPOab levels were significantly higher in the MetS group than
control group (PZ0.048 and PZ0.001, respectively). A ROC curve for anti-
TPOab to discriminate between patients with MetS and controls was determined
at R16.4 IU/ml (sensitivity 89.58%; specificity 80.52%; positive predictive value
85.15%; negative predictive value 86.11%; PZ0.001). Odds ratio for anti-TPOab
R16.4 IU/ml between MetS and control group were 35 547 (95% CI 14 979-
84 357).
Conclusions
Serum TSH and anti-TPOab levels were significantly higher in euthyroid subjects
with MetS than those without MetS. Subjects with MetS who had anti-TPOab
levels  R16.4 IU/ml  had  8-9-fold  risk  of  having  higher  than  normal  BMI;
sevenfold  risk  of  having  HT;
11-fold  risk  of  having  higher  than  normal
HOMA-IR; 2-fold higher incidence of family history of CAD; and fourfold risk of
having HL.
Keywords:  metabolic  syndrome,  anti-thyroid  peroxidase  antibody,  thyroid
stimulating hormone, cut-off
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP220
EP221
Effect of progesterone on intracellular calcium in mESC-derived
cardiomyocytes
Jeong Ung Hwang, Young-Kwon Choi, Hee Young Kang, Jin Yong An &
Eui-Bae Jeung
College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.
Sex steroid hormones effect on the early embryo-development and regulate the
calcium signaling in cardiac muscle. Progesterone (P4) has been reported to affect
both blood pressure and other aspects of the cardiovascular system. To confirm
the effect of P4 on early differentiation of mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells into
cardiomyocytes, the hanging-drop method was performed to form embryoid
bodies (EB). The mouse EBs (mEB) were suspended, attached onto six well plates
and cultured in differentiation medium containing steroid-free FBS without LIF.
P4 (10 nM) was applied at 2 days after attachment and media were replaced every
2 days.  To  assess  the  differentiation  into  cardiomyocytes,  the  presence  of
mesoderm markers such as Branchyury and cardiac-specific marker genes such as
Tbx20 and Ctn1 were confirmed. In addition, the expression of sex steroid
hormone-receptors, including PR, ER and AR, was confirmed. Interestingly,
mRNA  expression  of  AR  and  ER  increased  time-dependently  during
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
differentiation  into  cardiomyocytes,  while  expression  of  PR  exhibited  the
opposite pattern to that of the beating ratio. The beating ratio of the P4-treated
group (60.45G1.54%) decreased relative to that of the VE group (92.17G2.98%)
on day 12. Based on this response, the expression of contraction-related genes and
the intracellular Ca2C  level was investigated. The expression of contraction-
related genes such as Ryr2, Cam2, Trpv2 and Mlck3 was decreased in the
P4-treated group relative to the VE and RU486 group. The protein expression of
TRPV2 in P4-treated group also decreased. Subsequent measurement of the
intracellular Ca2C  level by confocal analysis revealed decreased level in the
P4-treated group. Moreover, the beating frequency of the EB population was
significantly lower in the P4-treated group. These results suggest that P4 induced
a decrease in intracellular Ca2C level with reduced expression of Ca2C channel
and regulatory proteins, thereby causing a decrease in contracting cardiomyocytes
with low beating frequency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP221
EP222
Anti-thyroid antibodies as an additional risk factor for endothelial
dysfunction in type 2 diabetic patients with subclinical hypothyroidism
Lilit Petrosyan
Yerevan State Medical University, Yerevan, Armenia.
Aim
Recent studies have shown that immune responses contribute to atherosclerosis.
The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between carotid imt
and the levels of anti-tpo in type 2 diabetic subjects with subclinical hypo-
thyroidism (sch).
Subjects and methods
A total of 109 non-smoking diabetic subjects with sch were recruited for this
study from June 2013 to May 2015. We used the analysis of variance to compare
the differences of imt among the groups with different anti-tpo levels. Carotid imt
was evaluated using high-resolution b-mode ultrasonography. Statistical analysis
was performed by using spss 18 (P value !0.05 was considered significant).
Results
The mean age of the participants was 54.3G5.06 years with diabetes duration
4.6G3.21 years. A positive correlation was found between the mean of six
segment carotid imt means and the levels of anti-tpo (rZ0.58). Carotid imt levels
were also significantly and positively associated with tsh, fpg and hba1c levels,
whereas negatively with hdl-c. There were no statistically significant differences
in the lipid profile and blood pressure levels between the groups with different
anti-tpo levels.
Conclusion
In type 2 diabetic subjects with sch we found significant association between
levels of anti-tpo and carotid imt. Measurement of thyroid antibodies can be
useful risk factor for progression of carotid imt in type 2 diabetic subjects.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP222
EP223
A novel lipid tetrad index as predictor of premature coronary artery
disease in diabetic patients
Saswati Das1,2, SK Gupta1 & MP Girish2
1Maulana Azad Medical College, Delhi, India;2GB Pant Hospital, Delhi,
India.
Background
The aim of this study was to explore if evaluation of lipid risk factors like
lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) and conventional lipid profile parameters can be a efficient
predictor of the cardiovascular risk in the patients of diabetes.
Methods
Sixty individuals with angiographically proven premature CAD and 30 healthy
individuals matched for age and sex were studied a tertiary health care center,
New Delhi, India, over a period of 18 months. CAD patients were divided into
two groups based on presence (nZ30) [Group I] and absence (nZ30) [Group II]
of type 2 diabetes mellitus. The serum levels of Lp(a) were measured by ELISA
and routine lipid profile (serum triglyceride, total cholesterol, HDL-C and LDL-C)
was measured by automated analyzer. Angiographic clinical vessel scoring was
also done for all the patients.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Results
Lp(a)  levels  for  Group  I  was
40.26G8.23 mg/dl,  Group  II  was
40.81G
11.16 mg/dl respectively which was significantly (i.e. P!0.01) higher than the
levels in healthy controls Lp(a)Z16.39G5.71 mg/dl]. We found a significant
increase  in  mean  levels  of  total  cholesterol
(TC),  low-density  lipoprotein-
cholesterol (LDL-C) and Triglyceride (TG) in cases than controls (P!0.01). In
contrast high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol
(HDL-C) values decreased. Non
HDL-C was calculated using the equationZ[total cholesterol (TC)KLDL-C].
Lipid Tetrad Index (LTI) and Atherogenic Index were also calculated for all
patients. The Modified Lipid Tetrad Index that we propose was calculated using
the equation MLTIZ[non-HDL-C!triglycerides!Lp(a)/HDL-C]. On analyzing
by cumulative probability plot the new modified Lipid Tetrad Index defined by us
is able to discriminate case and control populations more precisely than the
existing LTI and Atherogenic Index. The Modified Lipid Tetrad Index has a better
sensitivity and specificity than the existing LTI and also has a better correlation
with the angiographic vessel score in all patients.
Conclusion
The new proposed Modified Lipid Tetrad Index is a better marker and predictor of
severity of premature CAD in diabetic patients from India, than the existing Lipid
Tetrad Index and Atherogenic Index.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP223
EP224
Metabolic effects by H. pylori infection and eradication
Isabel M Cornejo-Pareja1, M Mar Roca-Rodríguez2,3, Leticia
Coín-Aranguez3,4, María Molina-Vega1, Cristina Díaz-Perdigones1,
Carmen Hernández-García1, Araceli Mun˜oz-Garach1, Juan Alcaide-Torres4,
Carlos Clu-Fernández1, Laura Vin˜uela-González5, Laura Mora-Navas5,
Isabel Mancha-Doblas1 & Francisco J Tinahones-Madue
˜o1
1Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Virgen de la Victoria Hospital,
Málaga, Spain;2Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Línea de la
Concepción Hospital, Cádiz, Spain;3Biomedical Research Center of
Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBER CB06/003), Carlos III
Health Institute, Madrid, Spain;4Research laboratory IBIMA, Málaga,
Spain;5Microbiology Department, Virgen de la Victoria Hospital, Málaga,
Spain.
Introduction
H. pylori infection has been related with diseases such as type 2 diabetes and
metabolic syndrome.
Objective
To  evaluate  changes  in  carbohydrates  metabolism,  lipid  profile  and  intake
regulating hormones induced by 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), before
and after antibiotic eradication treatment in patients colonized by H. pylori.
Materials and methods
A prospective study of 40 non-diabetics patients were performed. We analyzed
clinical data, carbohydrate and lipid metabolim, and ghrelin and GLP1 levels
before and after antibiotic eradication treatment.
Results
We studied 40 patients (60% women). Average age was 46.9G2; 70% had family
history of digestive disorders and
57.5% clinical history of gastrointestinal
disease (12.5% gastroesophageal reflux disease and 12.5% peptic ulcer). After
antibiotic treatment, we found a significant decrease in HbA1c (PZ0.014),
glucose at 600  (PZ0.018) and 1200  (PZ0.019) post-OGTT, and a significant
increase in HDL-cholesterol (PZ0.021). There were significant changes in basal
ghrelin levels (PZ0.05). We did not find significant changes in anthropometrics
parameters, blood pressure and C-peptide levels. We found some significant
positive correlations between weight and BMI with C-peptide, basal glucose and
insulin,  glucose
1200
post-OGTT  pre-  and  post-treatment;  also  between
triglycerides with HbA1c, C-peptide, glucose and insulin 1200  post-OGTT pre-
treatment; and between total-cholesterol with basal glucose and insulin pre and
post-treatment. Triglycerides and HDL-cholesterol correlated negatively. We did
not find significant correlations between ghrelin leves or GLP-1 with metabolic
parameters pre- or post-treatment;
90% of patients completed correctly the
treatment and 31.6% used ranitidine although 97.5% got H. pylori eradication
after conventional antibiotic treatment.
Conclusions
1)  H.  pylori  eradication  improved  carbohydrate  and  lipid  metabolism.
2) Significant correlations between anthropometric measurements, carbohydrates
and lipids metabolism before and after treatment were observed. 3) More than
95% of patients achieved H. pylori eradication with conventional antibiotic
treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP224
EP225
Testosterone therapy in female-to-male transsexuals: effects on body
weight, blood pressure and lipid profile
Carmen Acosta-Calero1, Claudia Arnás-León1, Ana Dellia Santana-Suárez1,
Sara Quintana-Arroyo1 & Fco Javier Martínez-Martín2
1Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrín,
Las Palmas GC, Spain;2Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospitales San Roque,
Las Palmas GC, Spain.
Introduction and objectives
A possible increase in blood pressure (BP) and other cardiovascular risk factors
has  been  associated  with  testosterone  treatment
(TT)  in  female-to-male
transsexuals (FMT). Nonetheless, the available evidence does not support an
increase in CV morbidity or mortality. We set out to analyze the impact of TT on
BP and lipid profile in a cohort of FMT patients.
Methodology
Retrospective observational study with no control group in a cohort of 34 FMT
patients who started TT following a standard protocol, comparing clinical and
routine laboratory data before and after 6-12 months.
Results
Age  was  27G6  years  and  BMI  26.7G3.1 kg/m2.  As  expected,  treatment
increased free testosterone levels and reduced 17-b-estradiol. BMI increased to
27.8G3.4 kg/m2 (P!0.001). There were no significant changes in systolic BP
(120.9G9.9-120.6G10.9 mmHg)  and  diastolic  BP
(82.4G7.6-80.9G
8.1 mmHg), glycemia, creatinine and total cholesterol (TC), but HDL-cholesterol
was significantly reduced (58.9G12.9-54.7G13.6 mg/dl, P!0.001) while LDL-
cholesterol
(99.9G23.9-103.5G23.0 mg/dl,  PZ0.030)  and  triglycerides
(166.6G37.8-178.1G45.2 mg/dl,  P!0.001) were  increased. There were  no
new-onset hypertension cases.
Conclusions
Our study does not support the BP increase reported in some series. We found,
however an increased BMI. In the literature, TT is associated with increased
muscle mass but not adiposity, thus we cannot infer an increased cardiovascular
risk. Regrettably we do not have impedanciometry data to elucidate this point.
There is a mild but definite deterioration of the lipid profile with reduced HDL-
cholesterol and increased LDL-cholesterol and triglycerides. That may be in part
attributed to reduced levels of
17-b-estradiol rather than a direct action of
testosterone on lipid metabolism. This is however considered as a common
adverse effect of TT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP225
EP226
Lipid accumulation product (LAP) and waist circumference to height
ratio (WHtR) associated with free androgen index but not with serum
testosterone and androstendione in women with PCOS
Justyna Kuliczkowska-Plaksej1, Andrzej Milewicz1, Lukasz Laczmanski1,
Diana Jedrzejuk1, Felicja Lwow2 & Marek Bolanowski1
1Department o Ednocrinology, Diabeology and Isotope Therapy, Wroclaw
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland;2Department of Health Promotion,
University School of Physical Education, Wroclaw, Poland.
Introduction
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is associated with metabolic disorders such as
insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, dyslipidemia and central obesity which
increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases (CVD). Lipid accumulation product
(LAP) and waist circumference to height ratio (WHtR) are novel CVD risk
predictors based on the assessment of waist circumference, height and serum
triglycerides.  The  aim  of  our  study  was  to  evaluate  the  LAP  and  WHtR
associations with hyperandrogenemia in women with PCOS.
Materials
The study group consists of 161 women with PCOS diagnosed according to the
Rotterdam criteria aged 24.7G4.9. We measured serum testosterone, andros-
tendione, sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), lipid profile by commercial kits.
Free androgen index (FAI) was calculated by standard formula. LAP cut-off value
was 34.5, and for WHtR was 0.5. Study group was divided into two subgroups
according to FAI value R5.0 and separately into three subgroups according to
serum testosterone and androstendione concentrations.
Results
Women with PCOS and FAI over 5.0 had significantly higher LAP values
than women with FAI below 5 (84.75% vs 15.25% respectively, P!0.005),
ORZ5.787, which suggests that FAI value O5 is associated with fivefold
increased risk of high LAP values. Similarly, PCOS women with FAIO5 had
higher WHtR, which suggests that increased FAI value is associated with higher
WHtR (OR-3.55, P!0.005). Such associations were not observed in case of
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
subgroups divided according to androstendione and testosterone concentrations -
WHtR and LAP were comparable. LAP and WHtR were significantly negatively
correlated with SHBG concentration and positively with FAI values, but not with
serum testosterone and androstendione levels.
Conclusions
Hyperandrogenemia expressed as FAI R5.0 is associated with significantly
higher values of novel CVD risk predictors - LAP and WHtR in women with
PCOS. Serum SHBG level as well as FAI value are good predictors of CVD risk
in women with PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP226
EP227
Higher than expected prevalence of the aortic dilation in Turner
syndrome in Lithuanian population
Ruta Kriksciuniene1, Birute Zilaitiene1,2, Egle Ereminiene3 &
Rasa Verkauskiene1,2
1Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Department of Endocrinology,
Kaunas, Lithuania;2Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Institute of
Endocrinology, Kaunas, Lithuania;3Lithuanian University of Health
Sciences, Department of Cardiology, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Introduction
Aortic dilation (AD) is the life threating complication of Turner syndrome (TS).
The reported prevalence of AD in TS various between 12 and 39%. Factors
predicting enlargement of diameter of aorta (DA) are still under investigation.
Aim
To assess the prevalence of AD in TS in Lithuanian population, to evaluate the
possible predictors of AD development.
Methods
Forty-three patients with TS aged R18 year were enrolled into the prospective
cross-sectional  study. Cardioechoscopy was used to evaluate  DA. DA was
adjusted for body surface area. AD was defined as DA O2.0 cm/m2. Age,
congenital cardiovascular disorders
(CCD), karyotype, metabolic parameters
(BMI, HOMA index), heart ratio (HR), blood pressure (BP), Estrogens (E),
Testosterone (T) levels duration of Growth Hormone (GH) and E use, E initiation
time were evaluated in the relation to AD.
Results
The dilation of the root of aorta (ADR) was reported in 37.2% (nZ16) of the
cases, the dilation of ascending (ADA) aorta was observed in 31% (nZ13). When
summarized ADR and ADA the prevalence of AD increased up to 48.8% (nZ21).
The largest diameter of the root of aorta (DAR) had strong negative correlation
with  BMI
(rZK0.7,  P!0.001),  HOMA  index  (rZK0.408,  PZ0.009),
E initiation age
(rZK0.33, PZ0.031). DAR correlated with HR (rZ0.37,
PZ0.014), duration  to E use
(rZ0.347, PZ0.023), T level
(rZK0.34,
PZ0.028).
The largest diameter of ascending aorta correlated with the duration of GH use
(rZ0.406, PZ0.009), and T level (rZK0.38, PZ0.014).
The frequency of AD did not differ between the classic (45, X0) and nonclassic
karyotype (non-45, X0) or the presence of CCD. There was no relationship
between BP, age and DA.
Conclusion
The prevalence of AD in TS in Lithuania was higher than reported in other
studies. HOMA index correlation with AD was identified for the first time.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP227
EP228
Hypertension and related cardiovascular diseases: a new role for low
levels of parathyroid hormone
Nadia Afzal1, Syed Ali Raza Kazmi2, Maleeha Akram1, Sarwat Jahan3,
Abida Raza4, Ghazala Kokab Raja5, Saba Nazir1, Sidrah Nazir5,
Afzaal Ahmed Naseem1, Mazhar Qayyum1 & Syed Shakeel Raza Rizvi1
1Department of Zoology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University
Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan;2Aga Khan Health Centre, Rawalpindi,
Pakistan;3Department of Animal Sciences, Quaid-e-Azam University,
Islamabad, Pakistan;4Nuclear Medicine Oncology and Radiotherapy
Institute (NORI), Islamabad, Pakistan;5University Institute of Biochemistry
and Biotechnology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University
Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
Hypertension or elevated arterial blood pressure (BP) is the most common
cause  of  cardiovascular  diseases
(CVDs).  The  arterial  BP  is  regulated  by
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone  system
(RAAS),  whereas  dysfunctional  RAAS
may lead to development of hypertension and associated CVDs. Parathyroid
hormone (PTH) secreted by parathyroid glands regulates RAAS by directly
stimulating aldosterone synthesis in zona glomerulosa cells, which leads to
development of hypertension. Conversely, RAAS controls PTH secretion; in high
dietary salt intake aldosterone promotes reabsorption of sodium and increases
calcium excretion in renal distal tubules followed by PTH secretion. PTH is an
independent cardiovascular risk factor, contributing to cardiovascular damage via
binding to PTH receptors on vascular smooth muscle cells and cardiomyocytes.
The present study examined the role of PTH in development of hypertension and
consequent  CVDs.  Hundred  hypertensive  CVD  patients  of  both  sexes  and
hundred healthy age-matched controls were investigated. Blood samples were
collected and plasma PTH concentrations were measured using ECLIA system.
Of 15 patients treated with RAAS inhibitors (RAASi), PTH concentrations were
low in 12 and within normal range in three patients. Among 26 patients under
non-RAASi treatment, PTH concentrations were low in 23 and normal in three
patients. Of 33 patients given combinations of RAASi and non-RAASi, PTH
concentrations were low in 27 and normal in six patients. In 26 untreated patients,
PTH concentrations were low in 22 and normal in four patients. Contrary to
earlier reports, PTH concentrations were below normal range in 84% patients,
whereas  PTH  concentrations  were  within  normal  range  in
16%  patients,
irrespective of any or no treatment. The majority of patients was married, had
exercise free lifestyle with no specific diet plan, belonged to low socioeconomic
status, fell in the obese category and had family history of CVDs. In conclusion,
our hypertensive cardiovascular patients had either low or normal values of PTH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP228
EP229
Role of additional risk factors of cardiovascular disease in men with
type 2 diabetes and obesity
Elizaveta Dzantieva, Irina Khripun, Sergey Vorobyev, Zalina Gusova,
Elena Bova & Michail Kogan
Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia.
Late identification and inadequate assessment of cardiovascular risk factors are
being considered as the main cause of high mortality in men with type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM).
Aim
To analyze the carbohydrate metabolism, levels of testosterone, proinflammatory
cytokines in patients with T2DM and obesity.
Methods
We  examined 123  men  with T2DM  and obesity  (mean  age  - 53.8G6.8).
Parameters of carbohydrate metabolism, total testosterone (T), leptin, C-reactive
protein (CRP), e-selectin were analyzed.
Patients were divided into four groups: the 1st group included 41 patients with
BMI 25-29.9 kg/m2, the 2nd group - 51 patients with BMI 30-34.9 kg/m2, the
3rd group - 23 patients with BMI 35-39.9 kg/m2, the 4th group - 8 patients with
BMI higher than 40 kg/m2.
Data were analyzed using Mann-Whitney U-test for two independent groups.
Results
Statistically significant differences in the parameters of carbohydrate metabolism
between groups were not found. The levels of T decreased as the increasing of
BMI. Leptin level in the 1st group was 7.16[4.89; 19.7] ng/ml, in the 2nd -
11.13[7.75; 14.88] ng/ml, in the 3rd - 16.8[10.86; 27.59] ng/ml, and in the 4th -
27.68[20.15; 36.41] ng/ml (P!0.005). The CRP concentrations were statistically
different in the 1st (4.49[2.06; 10.6] mg/l) and 4th (11.7[9.04, 13.95] mg/l) groups
(PZ0.006). The level of e-selectin in the 1st group was twice lower than in 4th
(41.16[32.03; 64.77] ng/ml vs 81.2[46.1; 123.65] ng/ml) (PZ0.02).
Conclusion
The excessive accumulation of adipose tissue leads to decreasing of T levels in
men with T2DM. Increasing of leptin and CRP concentrations indicates the
existence of systemic inflammatory process, which could be considered as an
additional risk factor for cardiovascular disease in patients with T2DM.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP229
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP230
A systematic review and meta-analysis of interventions for the
treatment of chronic non-hypovolaemic hypotonic hyponatraemia
Rachael McCool1, Julie Glanville1, Jennifer Quinn2, Karl O’Reilly2,
Larisa Petrakova2 & Clare Jamookeeah2
1York Health Economics Consortium, York, UK;2Otsuka Pharmaceuticals
Europe Limited, Wexham, UK.
Objectives
International  and  national  guidelines  on  the  treatment  of  chronic  non-
hypovolaemic hypotonic hyponatraemia differ widely. Using methods embodied
in the Cochrane Handbook, a systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted
to investigate the efficacy and safety of interventions for this condition.
Methods
Following   registration   of   the   review   protocol   with   PROSPERO
(CRD42015016670), systematic literature searches were conducted to identify
randomised or quasi-randomised controlled trials comparing any degree of fluid
restriction or any drug treatment with the aim of increasing serum sodium
concentration in patients with chronic non-hypovolaemic hypotonic hyponatraemia.
Where possible and appropriate, outcome data were combined in a meta-analysis.
Results
45 716 records (i.e. bibliographic references) were identified from the searches and
18 trials
(assessing conivaptan, lixivaptan, tolvaptan and satavaptan) met the
eligibility criteria. No RCT evidence was identified for effectiveness of treatments
other than for the ‘vaptans’ (listed above) for hyponatraemia. Results suggest that
all four vaptans significantly improve serum sodium concentration. Lixivaptan,
tolvaptan and satavaptan were associated with greater rates of response versus
placebo. There was no evidence of a difference between any of the vaptans
compared with placebo for mortality, discontinuation and rates of hypernatraemia.
Conclusions
Vaptans demonstrated superiority over placebo for outcomes relating to serum
sodium correction. Few studies measured health-related quality of life (QoL) using
a range of different instruments and showed no evidence that vaptans negatively
impact QoL. For all vaptans, cases of overcorrection were rare. With the exception
of vaptans, no RCT evidence was identified in relation to the alternative strategies
commonly employed including urea, mannitol, loop diuretics, corticosteroids,
demeclocycline, lithium and phenytoin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP230
EP231
Predictive factors of the metabolic syndrome in the obstructive sleep
apnea hypopnea syndrome
Ennaifer Houda1, Maalej Sonia2, Kamoun Ines1, Aouadi Samira2 &
2
Gharbi Leila
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, National Institute of
Nutrition, Tunis, Tunisia;2Pavilion D Abderrahmen Mami Hospital, Ariana,
Tunisia.
Introduction
The metabolic syndrome (MS) is a frequent complication of the obstructive sleep
apnea hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS). Its predictive factors have to be known by
the doctors setting in charge patients with OSAHS. The aim of this study was to
determine the prevalence of the MS and its predictive factors in Tunisian patients
with OSAHS.
Methods
A retrospective study including 181 patients with OSAHS from the respiratory D
department at the Abderrahmane Mami Ariana hospital Tunisia, between January
2010 and December 2014. Metabolic syndrome was defined according to the
International Diabetes Federation criteria of 2005. We looked for the MS related
factors by univariate then multivariate analysis.
Results
The prevalence of the MS was 68%. The frequency of the MS was highest between
56 and 65 years. Compared to the apneic patients without MS, those with MS were
older (55.9G12.82 years vs 51G15.27 years), more frequently women (61% vs
58.6%), and a lower frequency of postmenopausal women (76% vs 80%). But there
was no statistical difference for those parameters. The MS was more frequent in
patients with a history of hypertension (P!0.05), type 2 diabetes (P!0.0001) and
dyslipidemia (PZ0.001). Apneic patients with MS had more daytime sleepiness
(PZ0.04), an epworth score greater than or equal to ten was more observed (71.4%
vs 28.6%; PZ0.034), an attention disorders (PZ0.006) and a higher body mass
index (38.02G6.45 kg/m2 vs 35.85G7.75 kg/m2; PZ0.05). The MS was more
frequent in patients with a pathological Oto-rhino-laryngology examination (65.9%
vs 46.6%; PZ0.014). By studying the impact of the severity of OSAHS on the
occurrence of MS, we found no statistically significant difference.
Conclusion
The prevalence of MS is high in patients with OSAHS. Its occurrence does not
correlate with the severity of OSAHS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP231
EP232
Vascular calcification - Impact of PRRG1-4
Natascha Schweighofer1, Ariane Aigelsreiter2, Olivia Trummer1,
Daniela Kniepeiss3, Doris Wagner3, Philipp Stiegler3, Thomas Pieber1,4,
Helmut Muller3 & Barbara Obermayer-Pietsch1,4
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;2Institute of
Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;3Division of
Transplantation Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical University of
Graz, Graz, Austria;4CBmed, Center for Biomarker Research in Medicine,
Graz, Austria.
Pathophysiological  calcification  in  the  vasculature  favours  cardio-  and
cerebrovascular diseases. In patients with chronic kidney disease vitamin K
metabolites are associated with decreased vascular calcification.
We investigated the expression of the vitamin K dependent proteins PRRG1-4 in
vessels  and  bone  to  identify  differences  in  expression  pattern  during
atherosclerosis (AS) stages and compare the two tissue profiles.
Gene expression levels of PRRG1-4 were examined with predesigned TaqMan
assays on a LC480 system in vessels (external iliac artery and aorta) and bone of
26 organ donors. Relative Cp values were obtained by division with beta actin.
Determination  of  calcification  stages  was  done  histologically:  no  changes:
unaffected vessels, intima  thickening:  more  than  onefold  intima  thickening
without calcification, intima calcification: one or more calcification spots.
Gene  expression  of  PRRG1
decreased  in  bone  compared  to  vessels  in
atherosclerosis (PZ0.001).
In vessels gene expression of PRRG1, 3 and 4 were decreased in atherosclerosis
compared  to  normal  state
(PZ0.002,  PZ0.011,  PZ0.011).  In  bone  gene
expression of PRRG1-4 did not change when atherosclerotic vessels were present.
Looking at three stages of atherosclerosis, no differences in gene expression of
PRRG1-4  are  seen  in  intima  thickening,  in  intima  calcification  PRRG1
(PZ0.001) show differences in gene expression in bone and vessels.
In vessels PRRG1 (PZ0.013), 3 (PZ0.048) and 4 (PZ0.049) gene expression
decreased during intima thickening and keeps low in the calcification stage. In
bone gene expression of PRRG1-4 did not change during AS progression.
Gene expression of vitamin K dependent proteins changes during calcification of
the vessel wall implicating a more complex role of vitamin K dependent proteins
in vascular calcification than previously known.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP232
EP233
Relation of apelin with duration of diabetes in hypertension patients
with type 2 diabetes
Sergiy Koval, Kostiantyn Iushko & Tatiana Starchenko
Government Institution “L.T. Malaya Therapy National Institute of the
NAMS of Ukraine”, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
Introduction
Apelin is one of the cardiovascular factors, adipokin, which plays an important role
not only in the pathogenesis of hypertension, but also of type 2 diabetes (T2D). The
aim of the study was to assess apelin levels in blood serum and investigate its
relationship with duration of diabetes in hypertension patients with T2D.
Methods
The study involved 63 hypertension patients grades 2-3 with T2D (32 men and 31
women) aged 43 to 70. Depending on the duration of diabetes three groups of
patients were formed: 1. patients with T2D duration of 1 year (24%), 2. patients
with T2D duration of 1-5 years (44%), 3. patients with T2D duration of more than
5 years (32%). The blood level of apelin was tested using an ELISA. The control
group consisted of 14 practically healthy people.
Results
The  levels  of  apelin  in  blood  in  the  hypertension  patients  T2DM  were
significantly lower compared to healthy volunteers - 0.882(0.788; 0.924) ng/ml
vs 1.097(0.944; 1.171) ng/ml, P!0.01. Among patients with T2D duration of 1
year apelin levels were 0.926(0.871; 0.948) ng/ml (P!0.01 vs control group), in
patients with T2D duration over 5 years - 0.883(0.801; 0.911) ng/ml (P!0.001
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
versus control group), in patients with T2D duration of more than 5 years -
0.855(0.736;
0.863) ng/ml (P!0,001 vs control group). Patients with T2D
duration of more than 5 years had significantly lower blood levels of apelin than in
patients with T2D duration of 1 year - 0.855(0.736; 0.863) ng/ml vs 0.926(0.871;
0.948) ng/ml, P!0.05.
Conclusion
In hypertension patients with T2D blood levels of apelin were lower than in
healthy subjects. Patients with long duration of diabetes (over 5 years) had
significant reduction of apelin compared to patients with T2D duration of 1 year.
This may indicate deepening of disorders of apelin production with increasing
duration of T2D.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP233
EP234
Erythropoietin therapy and the cardiovascular outcome in cardio-renal
syndrome patients
Mohamed Mashahit
Fayoum University, Fayoum, Egypt.
Background
Kidney diseases and cardiac diseases can affect each other. Patient with renal
failure have many cardiac problems specially heart failure, anemia of CRF is
resistant to treatment with iron or even blood transfusion and erythropoietin
therapy gives good results as the failing kidney can not synthesize it
The previous published data showed that EPO treatment in patients with cardiorenal
syndrome (CRS) anemia led to reverse ventricular remodeling together with
systolic function improvement. These changes were supported by a fall in BNP, its
plasma lowering might indirectly signal an improvement in cardiac function and
outcome in patients with CRS in whom the anemia is corrected by EPO.
Aim of the work
To investigate the value of erythropoietin therapy in the treatment of CRS patients
with anemia and to evaluate the relationship between clinical, echocardiography
and serum BNP levels in those patients in comparison with the standard therapy as
iron and blood transfusion.
Patients & methods
The prospective study included 30 chronic renal failure patients under dialysis who
are presented with anemic heart failure diagnosed according to New York Heart
Association
(NYHA)  classification  which  was  proved  by  echocardiographic
finding (EF-FS). Plasma BNP was measured at the beginning and at the end of the
study after three months on erythropoietin therapy. patients were divided into
(Group 1) was treated with erythropoietin and (Group 2) was receiving standard
treatment (Group 2).
Results
(Group 1) on erythropoietin therapy got significant decrease in BNP level by
33.8%, vs only 17.5% in (Group 2) on traditional therapy like blood transfusion,
iron got and significant increase in the EF by 6.2% and FS by 3.6% in Group -1 vs
significant decreased EF% by 9.7% and FS by 3.2% in Group -2 patients and the
results were statistically significant (PO0.05).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP234
EP235
A retrospective observational-cohort study of the relationship between
reactive hypoglycaemia to postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
(PoTS)
Claire Goedhart2, Nick Gall1 & Abbi Lulsegged1
1Kings College Hospital, London, UK;2University College London
Hospitals, London, UK.
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (PoTS) occurs as a consequence of the
abnormal functioning of the autonomic nervous system (dysautonomia). Despite
the many associated conditions, the assessment and relationship to reactive
hypoglycaemia has not been explored in the clinical literature.
The purpose of this retrospective observational-cohort study was to identify
relationships between the physical and biochemical characteristics in potential
carbohydrate metabolic disorders in individuals diagnosed with PoTS. This study
used a standard prolonged oral glucose tolerance test (POGTT) over 5 hours.
Seventeen individuals were tested, with a mean age of 27.23 years; one patient
was unable to complete the test due to an intense and significant response to the
sugar load; 41% achieved peak glucose levels at 30 minutes and 57% attained
nadir  glucose
(ranges:
1.8-3.4 mmol/L)  between
210-240  minutes.  Fasting
insulin levels were noted in 30% of individuals, cortisol levels at baseline were
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
adequate and unremarkable. Joint hypermobility (29%), Inappropriate Sinus
Tachycardia
(31%)  and  Chronic  Fatigue
(22%)  were  additional  associated
conditions represented within the study group.
The data collected from this small study suggests a strong relationship between
PoTS and carbohydrate metabolic dysfunction. We observed that patients exhibited
a biphasic response with symptoms related to the both the nadir glucose and the
large changes in blood glucose that were independent of the recorded glucose level.
Significant symptoms occurred despite only 60% achieving a nadir glucose of
3.0 mmol/L; with a considerable number of these patients exhibiting a substantial
improvement in symptoms with dietary changes to address reactive hypoglycaemia.
Our study is hampered by the small number and homogeneity of our participants;
however our results underpin the recommendations of a low carbohydrate diet with
the consumption of meals every 2-3 hours for the stabilisation of blood glucose
values and an improvement to symptoms.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP235
EP236
Effects of statins on lipid and carbohydrate metabolism in patient with
type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases
Boris Mankovsky, Iryna Kondratska & Aleksandra Briukhova
P.L. Shupyk National Medical Academy of Post-graduate Education, Kyiv,
Ukraine.
Patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) type 2 is a group of high cardiovascular risk.
The incidence of coronary heart disease in their 2-4 times higher than in the
population  without  diabetes,
80%  of  cases  of  diabetes  combined  with
hypertension. At the same time any change in lipid metabolism leads to increased
cardiovascular risk in patients with type 2 diabetes. Statins is first-line drugs in
patients with dyslipidemia.
Materials and methods
The study involved 15 patients with type 2 diabetes and dyslipidemia in mean age
59.8G1.03 years, among them, 11 women and four male. All patients was
prescribed statins in mean dose 4 mg per day for 3 month. During the study were
determined the levels of glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) and lipid status before and
after treatment.
Results
Analyzing the results obtained in the groups of patients a significant decrease in
levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein. Triglyceride levels decreased
to normal range after 3 months. Statistically significant increase in glycated
hemoglobin was not confirmed.
Very low
Low-
density
High-
Total
Triglycer-
density
lipopro-
density
cholesterol
ides
lipoprotein
teins
lipoprotein
HbA1c, %
Before treatment
5.64G0.2
1.77G0.2
3.73G0.2
0.51G0.05
1.49G0.08
7.39G0.4
(nZ15)
After treatment
4.38G0.2*
1.65G0.2
2.53G0.2*
0.51G0.06
1.48G0.08
7.54G0.3
(nZ15)
*Significant difference between the indices before and after treatment (P!0.05).
Conclusions
Application of statin leads to the likely reduction in levels of total cholesterol, low
density  lipoprotein,  indicating  that  effective  treatment  of  dyslipidaemia  in
patients  with  type
2
diabetes.  Statistically  significant  effect  on  glycated
hemoglobin was not observed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP236
EP237
Fixed combination features in management of Hypertensive patients
with diabetes, dyslipidemia and subclinical hypothyroidism
Logvinenko Alla
Center “Institute of Cardiology Named after Academician
M.D. Strazhesko”, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Objective
A subclinical hypothyroidism (SH) is the independent factor of the risk of
cardiovascular diseases. The aim is to learn the possibility of optimization of the
standard treatment of lipid and carbohydrate disoders, antihypertensive treatment
of the levothyroxine replacement therapy (LRT) for women with metabolic
syndrome (MS) and SH.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Methods
137 women: 1gr.-68pts with MS, SH and with the LRT use; 2gr.-69pts with MS
and without LRT use. Body mass index, echocardiography, fast levels of TSH,
freeT4, freeT3, glucose, insulin, lipids, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
were determined. The insulin resistance was diagnosed at increase of the Homa-
index. All of the patients got 10 mg of atorvastatin, 10 mg of lisinopril (ACE
Inhibitors), metformin 1500 mg per day and patients of 1 gr. got additionally LRT
in the dose of 50 mg per day. Patients were observed at the beginning and in
6 months of treatment.
Results
In 6 months the authentically large serum levels of total cholesterol (TC5.4G
0.5 mmol/l) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL3.0G0.2 mmol/l) cholesterol in
2 gr.  remained  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  research.  This  pattern  of  lipid
abnormalities for women with MS, SH is important because it is a risk factor for
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The Homa-index 3.0G0.2, blood pressure
monitoring 143/85 mm Hg remained elevated. In 6 months the women with MS,
SH and LRT use of the 1 gr. demonstrated the reliable decline, the best decline of
all indicators: TC4.5G0.4 mmol/l, LDL2.0G0.3 mmol/l, glucose, Homa-index
2.2G0.3, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring 130/80 mm Hg.
Conclusions
The therapy of atorvastatin, lisinopril, metformin for women with MS, SH during
6 months is insufficient for the achievement of the target levels of TC, LDL,
glucose, Homa-index, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring while setting of the
combined therapy of LRT use, optimizes efficiency of lipid lowering therapy
allowing to attain the normal levels of lipids without the increase of dose of statin
and to decrease displays of insulin resistance and to improve antihypertensive
treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP237
EP238
Dyslipidemia in young women with polycystic ovary syndrome
Mehmet Emin Ayhan, Senay Arikan Durmaz, Ayse Carlioglu &
Selami Demirelli
Department of Endocrinology, Erzurum Regional Training and Research
Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey.
Introduction and aims
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a frequent endocrinopathy among with
young women. It is known that insulin resistance is encountered in the vast
majority of the women with PCOS and hence the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
and coronary artery disease are increased. These cardiac and metabolic risk
increments may also associated with hyperandrogenemia and dyslipidemia. The
metabolic  changes  of  lipid  profiles  in  young  women  with  PCOS  are  not
completely understood. The aim of this study is to evaluate changes of lipid
profile in both of patients with young women with PCOS.
Materials and methods
Thirty-six young women with PCOS (mean age: 23.4G4.6 year and mean body
mass index (BMI): 23.8G4.8 kg/m2), and 32 healthy normoovulatory age- and
BMI-matched women (mean age 23.4G4.6 years; BMI: 22.1G2.8 kg/m2) were
included in our study. The diagnosis of PCOS was made based on Rotterdam
diagnostic criteria. The BMI for all patients was calculated by the formula: [body
weight (kg)/height (m)2]. The waist circumference (WC) was measured. All blood
samples were taken between 08:00 and 10:00 am following 8 hour fasting period.
All hormonal and biochemical analysis were performed by automatic analyzer.
Results
The waist circumference in the PCOS and control groups were 80.6G7.3 and
77.5G2.0 cm,  respectively.  There  was  a  statistically  significant  difference
between  the  PCOS  and  control  group  in  terms  of  waist  circumference
(PZ0.018).
The glucose, total cholesterol (C), HDL-C, LDL-C and TG levels in PCOS group
were
89.9G11.3 mg/dl,
177.2G26.3 mg/dl,
54.8G12.3 mg/dl,
105.0G
23.5 mg/dl and 110.8G42.3 mg/dl respectively whereas the corresponding values
in the control group were 86.1G12 mg/dl, 161.2G30.6 mg/dl, 55.9G12.9 mg/dl,
94.3G24.5 mg/dl and 81.8G39.9 mg/dl, respectively. The differences in glucose,
HDL-C, LDL-C levels between PCOS and the control groups were not found to
be statistically significant whereas total cholesterol (PZ0.02) and triglyceride
(PZ0.006) levels were significantly different from control subjects. There were
not any correlations between WC and serum lipid levels such as total cholesterol,
HDL-C, LDL-C and triglyceride.
Conclusions
According to our study, elevated total cholesterol and triglyceride levels were
found in young women with PCOS. These changes of lipid levels could be lead to
predispose subclinical atherosclerosis in young women with PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP238
EP239
The cardiovascular complications and risk factors in cardiac patients
with type 2 diabetes
Olexander Bilovol, Lesya Bobronnikova & Irina Ilchenko
Kharkiv National Medical University, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
The purpose
To  investigate  the  prevalence  and  the  relationship  between  cardiovascular
complications (CVC) and risk factors (RF) in patients with essential hypertension
(EH) and coronary heart disease (CHD) in combination with diabetes mellitus
type 2 (DM-2).
Materials and methods
A retrospective analysis of case histories of 79 patients with cardiac profile (37 of
them women, with an average patient age - 59.6G6.2 years) with hypertension
stage II - III (hypertension duration - 8.9G3.2 years) and chronic forms of CHD
(CHD duration - 9.7G2.4 years) with concomitant DM-2 (DM-2 duration - 6.8G
1.6 years). Please observe the complications associated with diabetes, the level of
psychosocial stress to conduct the survey on a scale Reader.
Results
In the studied group of heart rhythm disorder (arrhythmia extrasystolic and atrial
fibrillation) were significantly more (P!0.05) occurred in women; males were
more individuals with overweight (respectively 62% of males and 48% females).
Atherogenic hyperlipidemia (AHL) was observed in 72% of women and 85%
men. Myocardial infarction (MI) associated with the AHL and the violation of the
compensation DM-2 (elevated glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) in average
8.14G1.23%) and is more common in men than in women (18% and 8%). The
connection AHL non-compliance with diet, irregular meals, and stress levels on
the scale of the Reader (95% CI: 0.016 - 0.038; P!0.001). A negative correlation
was between stress levels and body weight (rZK0.42); positive relationship -
between stress, the incidence of MI and frequent infectious diseases (rZ0.54).
Manifestations of CVC were less pronounced in patients with an active lifestyle
and in patients who had no bad habits (PZ0.01).
Conclusions
The results of the analysis indicate that patients with hypertension and CHD with
DM- 2 have more RF and CVC. Accompanying illnesses are very common in
these  patients,  and  modifiable  risk  factors,  including  hypertension,  DM-2?
Psychosocial stress should be considered as one of the main directions for the best
results from the treatment and prevention of CVC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP239
EP240
Metabolic syndrome as the result of the inversion of the cycle
‘day/night’
Irina Dzherieva & Natalia Volkova
Rostov State Medical University, Rostov on Don, Russia.
Background
The  pathophysiological  base  of  metabolic  syndrome  is  insulin  resistance.
According to Scott E.M., Grant P.J., insulin resistance is supposed to be formed
during  the  evolution  and  connected  by circadian  rhythms.  Melatonin is
synchronizer of circadian rhythms. The modern lifestyle leads to the breach of
melatonin synthesis because of absence of season changes in the length of a light
day due to the using of artificial lighting.
Aim
The aim was studied influence of melatonin on the development of MS in
inversion of the cycle ‘day/night’.
Design
Group ‘A’ (nZ25), patients with MetS (the National Cholesterol Education
Programs Adult Treatment Panel) and inversion of the cycle ‘day/night’ (at least
two night shift a week for 6 and more years), group ‘C’ (nZ23), healthy people,
working in day shifts. Blood pressure (BP) has been monitored for 24 years. It is
determined waist circumference (WC), high-density lipoproteins (HDL) fasting
triglycerides (TG), fasting glucose. The melatonin secretion has been determined
according to excretion 6-sulfatoxymelatonin (MT6S) in urine.
Results
Total MT6S in both groups was equal, PZ0.077. MT6S at 0400 h in group ‘A’
(25.3 95% CI: 17.8-32.8 ng/ml) was less P!0.014. Night MT6S in group ‘A’
(10.2
95%  CI: 7.3-13 ng/ml) was higher P!0.001. MT6S at 0400 h was
connected with BP(rZK0.34), TG
(rZK0.34), HDL (rZ0.26), glucose
(rZK0.38), P!0.05. Correlation has been determined between the day MT6S
and WC (rZK0.28, P!0.05). When the peak secretion of melatonin decreases, it
is determined increasing the risk of abdominal obesity (OR 1.8, 95% CI: 0.8-3.7;
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
P!0.05), hypertension OR 1.6 (95% CI: 0.8-3.4; P!0,05) risk of nocturnal
hypertension (OR 1.6, 95% CI: 0.8-3.4; P!0.05, hypertriglycerides (OR 1.4, 95%
CI: 0.7-2.1; P!0.05), HDL decreasing (OR 1.7, 95% CI 0.9-2.6, P!0.05)
Conclusions
During the long inversion of the cycle ‘day/night’, disturbance of melatonin
secretion leads to the development of metabolic syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP240
EP241
Detection of subclinical diabetic autonomic neuropathy by reflex
cardiovascular testing
Maram Mahdy, Fadila Gadalla & Hazem Khorshid
Ainshams University Hospitals, Cairo, Egypt.
Background
Diabetic  autonomic  neuropathy
(DAN)  is  among  the  least  recognized  and
understood complication of diabetes despite its significant negative impact on
survival and quality  of life in people with diabetes.  Diabetic  neuropathies
including  cardiac  autonomic  neuropathy
(CAN),  are  a  common  chronic
complication of type 1 and Type 2 diabetes and confer a high morbidity and
mortality to diabetic pateints. The reported prevalence of CAN varies greatly
depending on the criteria used to identify CAN and the population studied. CAN
is ultimately the result of complex interactions among degree of glycemic control,
disease duration and vascular risk factors. CAN encompasses damage to the
autonomic nerve fibers that innervate the heart and blood vessels, resulting in
abnormalities in heart rate control and vascular dynamics and is associated with a
high  risk  of  cardiac  arrhythmias,  sudden  death,
(possibly  related  to  silent
myocardial ischemia) and large costs to the welfare system. Clinical symptoms of
autonomic neuropathy generally do not occur until long after the onset of
diabetes. Subclinical autonomic dysfunction, however, can occur within a year of
diagnosis in type 2 diabetic patients and within 2 years in type 1 diabetic patients.
Objective
Possibility of the use of non-invasive cardiovascular tests for early detection of
subclinical autonomic neuropathy in type 2 diabetic patients.
Study design
This study included 40 type 2 diabetic male patients (from 30 to 70 years old) with
new onset or longstanding diabetes.
Results
20
(50%) diabetic patients had one abnormal test and 10 (25%) diabetic patients
had two abnormal reflex cardiovascular tests. Cardiovascular tests were affected
by age, higher body mass index, glucose control and diabetes duration.
Conclusion
Reflex cardiovascular tests can be used for the early screening of cardiovascular
autonomic neuropathy before more sophisticated and specific tests.
Keywords: DAN and reflex cardiovascular tests
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP241
EP242
Dietary intakes in relation to carotid intima-media thickness in subjects
with subclinical atherosclerosis
Eman Alissa1,2, Maisa’a Alsalmi1 & Sara Helmi1
1King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia;2King Fahd Medical
Research Center, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Demonstrating a relationship between diet and atherosclerosis should provide an
opportunity for potential risk reduction at an early stage of the known long disease
process instead of the need to intervene at the symptomatic disease stage. Thus,
we aimed to evaluate the relationship between levels of nutrients intake as
determined  by  food  frequency  questionnaire
(FFQ)  with  the  degree  of
atherosclerotic lesions as measured by carotid intima-medial ratio (CIMT).
One hundred eighty nine patients, aged between 40-78 years, were randomly
recruited  from  the  internal  medicine  clinics  at  King  Abdulaziz  University
Hospital in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Dietary intake data were collected by a 92 item,
semi-quantitative FFQ designed to assess average food intake over the previous
12 months. Macronutrient intakes were adjusted for total energy intake using the
nutrient residual method and were also presented as the percentage of total energy
intake (nutrient density). Common, internal and external carotid arteries on both
sides were scanned and the presence of plaques was noted using high resolution
B-mode ultrasonography. The mean values of maximum left and right CIMT
were determined. The presence of atherosclerotic plaque was defined as any
stenosis in either the right or left carotid artery.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Data are presented as mean G S.E.M. The associations between CIMT and dietary
intake levels were examined by univariate analysis while adjusting for potential
confounders. All statistical analysis was conducted using the SPSS 21.0 statistical
packages, and statistical significance was set at P!0.05. All P values were two-
tailed.
Our results suggest that dietary intake levels might affect the risk of subclinical
atherosclerosis. Significant findings were consistent with dietary recommen-
dations  and  lifestyle  intervention.  An  aggressive  cardiovascular  risk  factor
modification exerted early on in life might have a potential to reduce the risk of
atherosclerosis and the incidence of heart attack at later stages.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP242
EP243
Comparison of hypertriglyceridemic and normotriglyceridemic
patients in Konya and in the surrounding area in Turkey
Ahmet Kaya1, Elif Turan2, Mustafa Kulaksizoglu1 & Fahri Bayram3
1Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey;2Medical Faculty, Depart-
ment of Endocrinology, Bozok University, Yozgat, Turkey;3Medical
Faculty, Department of Endocrinology, Erciyes University, Kayseri,
Turkey.
Methods
This study, was a cross-sectional survey. Sampling design was based upon
multistage probability sampling. Patient with diabetes, hypertension, cardiovas-
cular diseases and any other diseases were excluded from the study. Age and
gender  were  noted.  Heights,  weights  and  waist  circumference
(WC)  were
measured. BMI was calculated. Blood pressure (BP) was measured. Fasting
thyrigliseride levels were evaluated. Patients were divided into two groups
according to their triglyceride levels (TG !150 mg/dl and TG O150 mg/dl.
Results
344 participants were screened for the study, 224 of them had normotriglycer-
idemia, 120 of them had hypertriglyceridemia. 38.5% of participants were male,
and 61.5% was female. Mean age was 48.76G14.08 years. Mean values were;
WC  91.14G13.54 cm,  BMI
28.42G5.87 kg/m2,systolic  BP
131.74G
25.62 mm/Hg,  diastolic  BP
81.05G15.17 mm/Hg in  normotriglyceridemia
group.  Mean  values  were;  WC
94.85G11.83 cm,  BMI  29.02G5.15 kg/m2,
systolic  BP
140.08G23.65 mm/Hg,  diastolic  BP
87.46G16.89 mm/Hg in
hypertriglyceridemia group. Except BMI the other variables were significantly
higher in the hypertriglyceridemia group (P!0.04). BMI was similar in each
groups.
Conclusion
Present study showed that without any comorbidities hyperthyrigliceridemia was
a risk factor of hypertension. High BP, increased WC, hypertrigliceridemia were
ATP III metabolic syndrome criterias. Metabolic syndrome is associated with
increased risk for cardiovascular disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP243
EP244
Cardiovascular safety; which antidiabetic agent will be your choice in
patients, who have coexisting cardiovascular disease?
Bayar Qasim
Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, Duhok University,
Duhok City/Kurdistan, Iraq.
Three eagerly awaited large, randomised, controlled cardiovascular safety trials
with new antidiabetic drugs have recently been completed. The results of these
studies are of wide interest to the diabetes and cardiology clinical scientific
communities, and the results have been presented at diabetes and cardiology
scientific meetings. These have studied drugs in each of the new classes of
antidiabetic  drugs:  sitagliptin,  a  dipeptidyl  peptidase-4
(DPP-4)  inhibitor;
lixisenatide, a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist; and empagli-
flozin, a sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitor.
The impressive reduction in total mortality that was seen with empagliflozin in the
EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial will lead to a change in the management of this
challenging group of patients, who have existing cardiovascular disease and may
be uncontrolled on insulin therapy, and initially the increased use of empagliflozin
should be focused on this group. As there are currently no data to support a similar
benefit with dapagliflozin or canagliflozin it is likely that empagliflozin will
quickly become the most prescribed drug in this class.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Three studies have now demonstrated no cardiovascular benefits with DPP-4
inhibitors  and  GLP-1
receptor  agonist,  and  although  these  drugs  are  well
tolerated. From a patient perspective empagliflozin was also well tolerated and
reduced weight. The prescribing of DPP-4 inhibitors may well decline in favour
of  empagliflozin.  Writers  of  guidelines  will  need  to  consider  revision  of
guidelines based on the results of these studies, and in time empagliflozin could
become the favoured secondline therapy after metformin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP244
EP245
Stress hyperglycemia in acute coronary syndrome and pulmonary
disease
Bayar Qasim
Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, Duhok University,
Duhok city/Kurdistan, Iraq.
In a large sample of elderly patients with acute myocardial infarction, higher
glucose levels were associated with a greater risk of 30-day mortality in patients
with diabetes compared to patients without diabetes. In addition to previous
hypothesis for mechanism of harm, recent studies have concluded that stress
hyperglycaemia is an independent predictor of left ventricular remodelling after
anterior myocardial infarction and may also contribute to arrhythmias.
There has also been a recent focus on biomarkers and tools to predict the risk of
stress hyperglycaemia, future diabetes and outcomes from intervention. Higher
cortisol  levels  have  been  found  to  be  predictive  of  the  onset  of  stress
hyperglycaemia as well as of subsequent normalisation of blood glucose levels.
In the case of the latter it is suggested that higher cortisol levels reflect stress-
precipitated hyperglycaemia whereas lower cortisol levels suggest ‘underlying
glucose intolerance’ as the most likely explanation for hyperglycaemia.
HbA1c  has  also  been  studied  with  varying  results.  One  study  found  that
hyperglycaemia and non-elevated HbA1c was associated with a poor prognosis
following acute myocardial infarction whereas another study did not find any
association between mortality and HbA1c.
Another recent field of interest has been hperglycemia in setting of pulmonary
disease. Stress hyperglycaemia is seen in up to 50% of patients hospitalised with
exacerbations  of  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease  and each
1 mmol/l
increase in blood glucose has been shown to increase the absolute risk of death or
prolonged hospital stay by 15%. Prospective studies are currently underway to
determine  whether  blood  glucose  control  can  improve  chronic  obstructive
pulmonary disease exacerbation outcomes. A similar picture has been identified
with pneumonia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP245
Clinical case reports - Pituitary/Adrenal
EP246
Five years of growth hormone therapy in children born small for
gestational age
Corina Galesanu, Andra Iulia Sandru, Ilinka Grozavu, Adrian Condrea &
Mihaela Negru
University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Gr.T.Popa’, Iasi, Romania.
Introduction
Growth hormone (rhGH) is an effective treatment for short children born small for
gestational age (SGA) who fail to demonstrate catch-up growth by 2-4 years of
age. This children usually do not have classical GH deficiency, but either low GH
secretion or reduced sensitivity to GH. The goals of therapy are to achieve a
normal height in early childhood and an adult height within the normal target
range.
Objectives
Evaluation of efficacity and safety profile in the first 5 years of rhGH treatment in
ten SGA children.
Methods
The study enrolled ten SGA children (six boys, four girls). All patients were given
a mean dose of 0.035 mg/kg per day and followed for a period of minimum 5years
(mean 5.68 years).
Results
The mean height expressed in S.D. raised from K2.43 at diagnosis to C0.28 after
5 years. In the first 5 years of therapy there were no cases of diabetes mellitus or
impaired  glucose  tolerance,  two  patients
(20%)  presented  impaired  fasting
glucose, one patient (10%) developed hypothyroidism and four patients (40%)
presented transitory subclinical hypothyroidism. Mean IGF1 values were higher
than normal range, but not exceeding C2DS.
Table 1 Data from the first 5 years of rhGH therapy.
Parameter
Baseline
1 year
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
Chronological
6.29
7.29
8.29
9.29
10.29
11.29
age (years)
Bone age
4.05
4.75
5.56
7.15
9.3
11.05
(years)
Mean IGF-1
77.5
305.38
258.71
329.85
412.44
476.55
values (ng/ml
(C0.24)
(C1.49)
(C1.54)
(C1.26)
(C1.47)
(C1.85)
and S.D.)
Height (S.D.)
K2.43
K1.37
K0.91
K0.68
K0.43
C0.28
Growth velocity
–
11.76
9.24
8.16
7.68
6.24
(cm/year)
Conclusions
GH therapy is reasonably safe and effective in increasing linear growth in children
born SGA who fail to have catch-up growth. Maximum height velocity was
registered in the first year of treatment, 11.76 cm/year. and declined in time. No
adverse events. Overall, GH treatment was safe and well tolerated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP246
EP247
Pituitary adenoma associated with pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
Fernando Guerrero1, Karina Arcano2, Agustina Pia Marengo1,
Mercedes Robledo3, Juan José Díez2, Arturo Lisbona4, Pedro Iglesias2 &
Carles Villabona1
1Department of Endocrinology, Bellvitge University Hospital, Barcelona,
Spain;2Department of Endocrinology, Ramón y Cajal University Hospital,
Madrid, Spain;3Spanish National Cancer Research Center, CNIO, Madrid,
Spain;4Department of Endocrinology, Central Military University Hospital,
Madrid, Spain.
Background
Pituitary adenomas (PA) and pheochromocytomas/paraganglioma (pheo/PGL)
can occur in the same patient due to coincidence or of shared pathogenesis. There
is evidence that, at least in some cases, classical pheo/PGL predisposing genes,
may also play a role in pituitary tumorigenesis. A new condition called ‘the three
P Association’ (3PAs) for the combination of PA with pheo/PGL has been
recently described in patients with or without succinate dehydrogenase (SDHx)
germline mutations.
Aim
To report our experience on 3PAs in three patients. Case 1: A 54-year-old male
patient with bilateral pheochromocytoma underwent bilateral adrenalectomy.
Three years later he was diagnosed with growth hormone-secreting pituitary
adenoma that was completely resected after transsphenoidal surgery. Genetic
screening for pheo/PGL genes (RET, VHL, SDHB and SDHD) were negative
(including sequencing and gross delection analysis). Case 2: A 38-year-old-
female patient was initially seen for macroprolactinoma and chronically treated
with dopamine agonist. Four years later the patient was diagnosed with multiple
PGL (cervical and unresectable mediastinal PGL), currently under somatostatin
analogue therapy. Her brother was operated for PGL and gene study revealed a
SDHB exon 1 deletion (genetic disorder associated with familial PGL type 4).
This genetic rearrangement was also detected in her mother and sister. Case 3: A
55-year-old female patient was diagnosed with a right pheochromocytoma. She
underwent  right  adrenalectomy.  Five  years  later  she  was  diagnosed  with
GH-secreting pituitary microadenoma and treated with transsphenoidal surgery.
She was also diagnosed with primary hyperparathyroidism without surgical
criteria. Genetic study for MEN 1, RET and VHL was negative.
Conclusion
The association of PA and pheo/PGL is an exceptional event, but recent insights
provide strong evidence that PA can develop in patients with pheo/PGL or
germline SDHx subunit mutations. Genetic testing should be considered in all
patients or families with 3PAs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP247
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP248
Kallmann syndrome and ichthiosis. A case of contiguous gene deletion
syndrome
Irene Berges-Raso1, Olga Giménez-Palop1, Assumpta Caixàs1,
Elisabeth Gabau2, Laia Casamitjana1, Ismael Capel1, David Subias1 &
Mercedes Rigla1
1Corporació Sanitària Parc Tauli, Endocrinology Department, Institut
Universitari Parc Taulí-Uab, Sabadell, Spain;2Corporació Sanitària Parc
Tauli, Genetics Department, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí-UAB, Sabadell,
Spain.
Introduction
Kallmann Syndrome (KS) is a genetically heterogeneous disease characterised
by hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism with anosmia or hyposmia. It can be
associated with X-linked ichthyosis (XLI) in a contiguous gene syndrome related
to a Xp22.3 region deletion, which include KAL1 and STS genes.
Case report
We report a case of a 32-year-old male with ichthyosis referred for evaluation of
high height (2.07 m), overweight (BMI 29.6 kg/m2) and microgenitalia.
He had absence of secondary sexual characters. Baseline plasma levels of
testosterone were 0.12 ng/ml (2.49-8.36), FSH 0.25 mUI 7 ml (1.5-12.4) and LH
!0.1 mUI/ml (1.7-8.6). Prolactin levels were 7.67 ng/ml (4.04-15.2). MRI
showed hypoplastic hypophysis, ultrasound showed small testes and a bone
densitometry revealed osteoporosis (spine T score K3.55). Karyotype was 46
XY.  He  was  diagnosed  of  hypogonadotrophic  hypogonadism  associated  to
ichthyosis.  Genomic  DNA  samples  were  extracted.  A  microarray-based
comparative genomic hybridisation test (aCGH) was performed. The result was
a pathogenic copy number DNA variant: arr(hg19)Xp22.32p22.31 (4 699 972-
9 427 600)xo which contains 12 genes: NLGN4X, VCX3A, HDHD1, STS, VCX,
PNPLA4, MIR651, VCX2, VCX3B, KAL1, FAM9A, FAM9B. Among these
genes, STS is responsible for XLI and KAL 1 gene is responsible for the X-linked
form of KS. Further studies revealed that the deletion was inherited from his
mother. Females with similar Xp22 deletions are phenotypically normal except
for short stature, because they need only one copy of this region to be normal.
He  started  intramuscular  testosterone  undecanoate  supplementation  in  pro-
gressive doses to achieve secondary sexual character development and continued
with substitutive treatment. Three years later bone densitometry improved (spine
T score K2.78 S.D.).
Conclusion
KS is a genetically heterogeneous disease that can be associated with other
diseases in a contiguous gene syndrome. New genomic tests provide a better
understanding and knowledge of genetic diseases, diagnosis and management.
Special attention has to be drawn to complications like osteoporosis, infertility
and testis cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP248
EP249
Spinal metastasis in childhood-onset craniopharyngioma: Case report,
review of the literature and experiences in the German childhood-onset
craniopharyngioma registry
Martin Jaspers1,2, Anika Hoffmann1, Kristin Lohle1, Angela Brentrup3 &
Hermann L Muller1
1Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum Oldenburg, Medical Campus
University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany;2UMCG, Groningen, The
Netherlands;3Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Munster,
Munster, Germany.
Background
Remote recurrence and metastasis are unusual complications in childhood-onset
adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma mainly occurring either along a previous
surgical route or by seeding via cerebrospinal fluid.
Case description
An 11-year-old female patient initially presented with headache and neck pain as
well as nausea over the course of 2 months. A sellar/suprasellar mass (4.0 cm!
4.0 cm 5.0 cm) was detected on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Initial
surgery resulted in complete resection (CR) based on intraoperative microscopic
inspection.  CR  was  confirmed  by  postoperative  MRI.  The  tumor  was
histologically  determined  to  be  an  adamantinomatous  craniopharyngioma.
Seven years after initial CR, the patient presented with back pain spreading to
the ventral side of the upper legs as well as a loss of strength. MRI showed a spinal
neoplasm at the level of T12/L1 without any sign of local sellar/suprasellar
recurrence. The patient underwent a spinal tumor resection without compli-
cations. Histological analysis confirmed the spinal tumor to be a metastasis of the
initial adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma. Clinical complaints due to the
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
spinal metastasis ceased after CR. Currently, the patient is in complete remission
9 years after CR of the sellar/suprasellar craniopharyngioma and 2 years after CR
of a spinal metastasis of craniopharyngioma.
Only one case of an adult patient with spinal metastasis of an adamantinomatous
craniopharyngioma has been reported in the literature up to now. Our case
represents  the  first  case  of  childhood-onset  craniopharyngioma  with  spinal
metastasis in the total cohort of 582 patients, recruited prospectively in the
German childhood craniopharyngioma registry.
Conclusions
We  report  the  first  case  of  remote  spinal recurrence  of  a childhood-onset
adamantinomatous  craniopharyngioma.  Spinal  metastasis  is  a  very  rare
complication in childhood-onset craniopharyngioma and should be considered
in long-term follow-up of childhood-onset craniopharyngioma patients with
peripheral neurological complaints and symptoms.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP249
EP250
Capecitabine and temozolomide (CAPTEM) treatment of atypical
macrocorticotropinoma in a patient with Nelson’s syndrome
Maria Kurowska1, Joanna Malicka1, Jerzy S Tarach1, Grzegorz Zielinski2 &
Maria Maksymowicz3
1Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland;
2Department of Neurosurgery, Military Medical Institute, Warsaw, Poland;
3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Diagnostics, M. Sklodowska-
Curie Memorial Cancer Centre and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction
Atypical pituitary adenomas are often characterized by rapid growth and massive
invasion of the surrounding structures. Usually, they are associated with poor
prognosis and high recurrence rate due to resistance to conventional therapies.
When surgery and radiation are ineffective, alternative therapies remain the last
line treatment. Lately, a novel chemotherapy with capecitabine and temozolo-
mide was proposed as a highly effective and extending the life of the patient
procedure in refractory corticotroph pituitary tumors.
Aim
Aim  of  study  was  to  present  an  effectiveness  of  CAPTEM  in  atypical
corticotropinoma in a patient with Nelson’s syndrome.
Case report
56-year-old male with Cushing’s disease established 10 years earlier. During the
first MRI 10!9!8 mm pituitary adenoma was detected. Initially the patient
underwent three subtotal selective transsphenoidal adenomectomies (2005, 2007,
2009). A postoperative pathologic exploration revealed a densely granulated
corticotroph cell adenoma with MIB-1 index O10% and MGMT (K). Due to a
re-growth of the tumor, the patient underwent consecutive stereotactic radio-
therapy (9Gy) and received cabergoline for 19 months. Afterwards, because of
intractable complications of hypercortisolism, as well as previous treatment
failures, a total bilateral adrenalectomy was performed as a lifesaving procedure.
Subsequently,  the  patient  developed  Nelson’s  syndrome  with  intense  skin
hyperpigmentation  and  aggressive  pituitary  tumor  progression.  In
2011
transcranial neurosurgery and tomotherapy (45Gy) were applied. Due to next
re-growth of the tumor with its expansion to cavernous sinuses and suprasellar
region with a compression of the optic chiasm, and exhaustion of all conventional
therapeutic options, the patient was admitted to our department for qualification to
TMZ. Two cycles of TMZ (150 mg/m2) for 5 days were applied and because of
the progression of eye damage CAPTEM was introduced. After four cycles
hormonal and imaging stabilizations are observed.
Conclusion
CAPTEM can be an effective treatment option in atypical adenomas in Nelson’s
syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP250
EP251
21-hydroxylase deficiency presenting as bilateral adrenal masses in the
sixth decade of life in a phenotypically male but genetically female
patient
Evgenia Panagiotidi, Georgios Papadakis, Paraskevi Manitarou,
Ioannis Tzaves, Eleni Triantafillou, Styliani Kalaitzidou, Aggeliki Sapera,
Konstantinos Katsoulis, Victoria Kaltzidou & Athanasia Tertipi
Department of Endocrinology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus,
Athens, Greece.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD) is a common inherited disorder accounting
for 90-95% of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) cases. Some cases may be
diagnosed in adulthood after the incidental discovery of adrenal masses on
computerized tomography (CT).
Case report
A 59-year-old male was investigated for incidentally discovered bilateral adrenal
masses in an abdomen CT scan, measuring 5 cm on the right and 8 cm on the left
adrenal. At birth he had a phallus and partial fusion of the labioscrotal folds and
was diagnosed with bilateral cryptorchidism and hypospadias. He was raised as a
man. At the age of 15 the patient menstruated and karyotype testing revealed the
XX cromosomal sex. He underwent multiple operations for the creation of a
scrotum and the restoration of hypospadias. The uterus and ovaries were removed
and prosthetic testes were placed in the scrotum. He was not receiving any
cortisone supplementation. On physical examination he had a male appearance
with sparse beard male-type baldness, height was 138 cm and weight 73 kg. He
had gynecomastia and a 5 cm phallus with prosthetic testes. Testosterone was
7.8 ng/ml (nr for women 0.07-0.65), S-DHEA 420 mg/dl (22-263), E2 144 pg/ml
(5.7-102), ACTH 80.5 pg/ml (7.3-63.3), PRA 3.6 ng/ml per min (0.5-1.9),
0
aldosterone 450 pg/ml (66-173), and on Synacthen test: 17OHP 00 92 ng/ml, 30
139, 600 226 and cortisole 00 199 nmol/l, 300 242, 600 285. Genetic testing of the
21-hydroxylase gene revealed a compound heterozygoticity for the mutations
I172N and Q318X. Following left adrenalectomy histology revealed a diffusely
hyperplastic adrenal cortical zone, measuring in total12!8!4 cm with regions
of myelolipoma transformation.
Conclusions
Long standing, untreated classic virilizing form of CAH may lead to extensive
hyperplasia of the adrenal cortex. It is prudent to measure 17OHPG in cases with
massive adrenal enlargement.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP251
EP252
Acute myeloid leukemia presenting with panhypopituitarism and
diabetes insipidus
Fulya Akin1, Veysel Erol2, Sercan Erturk1, Yilmaz Kiroglu3,
Senay Topsakal1 & Guzin Yaylali1
1Department of Endocrinology, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey;
2Department of Internal Medicine, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey;
3Department of Radiology, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey.
Introduction
Acute myeloid leukemia infiltrates the CNS in up to 50% of cases. In contrast, the
infiltration of the pituitary gland by leukemia cells is unusual. To date, AML
presenting with central diabetes insipidus (CDI) has been rarely reported. Here,
we present a patient with AML (subtype clasification is proceeding) presenting
with panhypopituitarism and CDI.
Case report
A 37-years-old man, with no significant past medical history, presented to
Emergency department with complaint of high fever. Laboratory tests revealed
increased CRP, ESR, serum sodium was 157 mEq/l and free cortizol was 3 mg/dl.
Patient diagnosed as panhypopituitarism according to the pituitary hormones
values
(TSH:0.04 mIU/ml
(0.2-4.2),  ft4:
0.801 ng/dl
(0.99-1.65),  kortizol:
3.21 mg/dl,  ACTH:
12.3 pg/ml).  On  the  mri  scan,  FLAIR  image  shows
hyperintense lesions in bilateral hypothalamic areas probable due to leukemic
infiltration and mri spectroscopy reveals high cho/cr and cho/naa ratios. Patient
admitted the endocrinology clinic and hyponatremic IV hydration (%0.45 saline
and %5 dextroz) was given in order. After correction of hypernatremia and
dehydration, water deprivation test showed worsening of hypernatremia (sodium:
156 mEq/l), and serum osmolality test showed hyperosmolality (320 mosm/kg)
with inappropriate low urine osmolality (170 mOsm/kg). Patient was treated with
prednizolon, desmopression and levoT4 sodium for panhypopituitarism. On the
third day of admission, The laboratory studies showed neutropenia (white blood
cell 2.6
k/ml), macrocytic anaemia (Hemoglobin 10.2 mg/dl, MCV 131.7 fl),and
mild thrombocytosis. A diagnosis of myeloid leukemia was confirmed after
examination of a peripheral blood and bone marrow aspiration (the genetic
analysis is proceeding).
Conclusion
In conclusion, this is the first case of reporting coexistance of AML, CDI,
panhypopituitarism  and  hypothalamic  lesions  probable  due  to  leukemic
infiltration.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP252
EP253
Adrenal insufficiency precipitated by Graves’ hyperthyroidism in a
patient on megestrol acetate treatment
Carolina García-Figueras Mateos, Manuel Cayón Blanco &
Alberto Terrón Pernía
Hospital SAS Jerez de la Frontera, Jerez de la Frontera, Spain.
Introduction
Megestrol acetate (MA) is commonly used to promote weight gain in patients
with HIV infection. Adrenal insufficiency (AI) has been reported as an adverse
effect of MA but this association is not frequently recognized in clinical practice
and only few cases develop symptoms of AI. We describe a case of symptomatic
AI precipitated by Graves’ hyperthyroidism in a HIV patient on long-term MA
treatment.
Case report
A 44-year-old man with HIV-infection, followed in Infectious Diseases Unit
since 1999, was admitted at hospital by weight loss, tremor and tachycardia.
Thyroid  function  study  revealed  autoimmune  hyperthyroidism
(TSH:
0.01 mUI/ml; FT4: 4.88 ng/dl and positive TSH receptor antibody). Therapy
with methimazole was started. He was taking 240 mg of MA daily irregularly for
more than 11 years and discontinued MA for long time periods, but he never
developed symptoms of AI. One month after discharge, he developed diarrhoea,
abdominal pain, hypotension and asthenia. Laboratory analysis found hypona-
tremia  and  hyperkalemia  and  thyroid  function  still  remained  uncontrolled
(elevated FT4 and undetectable TSH). Serum cortisol was 1.1 mg/dl and after
cosyntropin stimulation, were 7.6 and 10.7 mg/dl at 300 and 600 , respectively. The
adrenocorticotropic hormone level was !5 pg/ml (normal, 5-50 pg/ml) and
adrenal antibodies were negative. MA was discontinued and steroid replacement
was initiated. The symptoms disappeared and the patient improved progressively.
During follow-up, corticoids dose was progressively decreased to discontinu-
ation, and radioactive iodine was prescribed to control hyperthyroidism. One year
later, cortisol and ACTH levels were normal without need for corticoids.
Conclusions
To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  it  has  not  been  reported  that  Graves’
hyperthyroidism causes a symptomatic AI in patients with unrecognized or
subclinical adrenocortical disease associated with MA treatment. Clinicians
should be alert to the possibility of development of AI in patients taking MA,
particularly if a stress situation is present.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP253
EP254
Bilateral adrenal mass mimicking adrenocortical carcinoma
Sule Canlar1, Celal Idemen2, Aysun Yalci3, Alpay Azap3 &
Murat Faik Erdogan1
1Ankara University of Medicine, Endocrinology and Metabolism Diseases,
Ankara, Turkey;2Ankara University of Medicine, Internal Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey;3Ankara University of Medicine, Infectous Diseases,
Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Bilateral  adrenal  mass  presents  a  unique  diagnostic  challenge  and  carries
additional risk of being metastasis. The differential diagnosis of bilateral adrenal
mass  include  primary  or  secondary  neoplastic  disorders
(adrenocortical
carcinoma, lymphoma, metastases), pheochromocytoma, longstanding congenital
adrenal hyperplasia and macronodular adrenal hyperplasia, infections such as
tuberculosis, histoplasmosis and blastomycosis.
Case
Thirty-five year-old male presented with weight loss, fever, emesis and headache.
Laboratory findings showed hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, low cortisol serum
levels  and  significantly  elevated  ACTH,  CRP  serum  levels  and  ESR.
Glucocorticoid treatment was initiated immediately. For evaluation of etiology
of severe weight loss, CT disclosed bilateral adrenal mass, milimetric pulmonary
nodules and cerebral-cerebellar nodulary lesions. Upon investigation, the patient
complained testicular pain and swelling, and physical examination illustrated
testicular mass ultrasound revealed epididimal thickening, heterogeneity and
ductal hypoechoic nodulary lesions. For differential diagnosis, PET CT scan was
performed  and  high  adrenal  mass  uptakes
(SUVmax:18,4)compatible  with
malignancies was detected. In the search for a definitive diagnosis, between
metastatic adrenal carcinoma, metastatic carcinoma of unknown origin (lung,
malignant melanoma etc.) and infectious causes, ultrasound guided fine needle
aspiration  biopsy  of  the  adrenal  mass  was  carried  out.  Histopathological
examination demonstrated necrotizing granulomatous inflammation consistent
with tuberculosis. Anti-tuberculosis treatment was started as soon as possible and
the patient had a remarkable recovery through several months.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
The most common causes of Addison’s disease are idiopathic adrenal atrophy and
adrenal  tuberculosis.  Globally,  Tuberculosis  prevalence  decreases  and  it  is
reported that TB prevalence in 2015 was 42% lower than it used to be in 1990.
However, tuberculosis is still an important health problem. Adrenal tuberculosis
should be taken into consideration when adrenal failure and bilateral adrenal
involvement is detected.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP254
EP255
Iatrogenic cushing syndrome and acute adrenal insufficiency due to the
association of inhaled corticosteroids and ritonavir
Ivana Zubillaga1, Carla Francés1, Joana Nicolau1, Pilar Sanchis1,2,
Jacobo Blanco1, Concepción Conchillo1 & Lluís Masmiquel1
1Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca,
Baleares, Spain;2Department of Investigation, Hospital Son Llàtzer,
Palma de Mallorca, Baleares, Spain.
Introduction
Hepatic metabolism of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) takes place via cytochrome
P450 3A4. Nevertheless, it can be decreased by enzyme inhibitors such as
itraconazole or ritonavir, thus leading to an increase in the bioavailability of ICS.
This can result in an accumulation of the steroid drug and a cushing’s syndrome.
Case report
We present the case of a 48 year old woman with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection on highly active antiretroviral therapy that included ritonavir.
Inhaled fluticasone was added to her treatment of severe chronic asthma. Two
years later, she was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit due to a massive upper
gastrointestinal bleeding secondary to an erosive gastritis, which required support
with vasoactive drugs during 72 h. However, 1 week after her admission, the
patient started to present  hypoglycemias and hypotension, accompanied by
intense astenia and weakness of the inferior limbs. Adrenal insufficiency was
suspected. The Physical exam showed a cushingoid appearance. Blood tests were
carried out, showing normal renal and liver functions and ions. Her morning
serum cortisol concentration was 3.0 mg/dl (5-17 mg/dl) and morning Adreno-
corticotropic hormone (ACTH) was 6.7 pg/ml (!46 pg/ml)). A craneal CT was
done in order to rule out structural disease (MRI could not be done due to the
morbid obesity of the patient) and it was normal. Therefore, final diagnosis was
iatrogenic  Cushing’s  syndrome  and  acute  adrenal  insufficiency  due  to  the
association of inhaled corticosteroids with ritonavir.
Conclusion
This case emphasizes the need for pharmacovigilance when managing patients on
complex drug regimens for physicians treating HIV infected patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP255
EP256
Atypical X-linked adult adrenoleukodystrophy with cerebellar and
brainstem involvement - a case report
Elena Lazar1, Mirela Ilie1, Radu Tanasescu2, Bogdan Popescu2 &
Corin Badiu2
1National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2C.Davila
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Background
X-linked  adrenoleukodystrophy
(ALD)  is  a  peroxisomal  disorder  of  beta-
oxidation that results in accumulation of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs)
in various tissues. The clinical phenotype of X-ALD in adults is variable and
involves adrenal, gonadal and nervous system dysfunction (adrenomyeloneuro-
pathy, AMN). Patients with AMN typically develop spastic paraparesis due to
progressive degeneration of the cerebral white matter.
Objective
To report a case of a rare adult-onset cerebello-brainstem presentation of a
sporadic  ALD  with  sparing  of  the  occipito-parietal  lobes  and  autonomic
dysfunction which resembles multi-system atrophy.
Case report
We report the case of a 33 year old man with Addison’s disease since his early
twenties and a 2-year history of progressive neurological deterioration preceded
by a psychiatric bout with mania and psychosis. The neurological presentation
started as a slowly progressive gait ataxia, unsteadiness and the need for walking
support.  Speech  was  poor  and  dysarthric  and  uninhibited  behaviour  was
occasionally  present.  After
2
years  of  follow-up,  generalized  ataxia  was
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
accompanied  by  atypical  parkinsonism,  urinary  disturbances  and  spastic
paraparesis with inability to walk. The brain MRI showed a marked cerebellar
and  midbrain  atrophy  with  bilateral  demyelination  of  the  long  tracts  and
hypotrophy of dorsal columns of the spinal cord, the latter being highly suggestive
for AMN. Of note, the occipito-parietal parenchyma was spared. A differential
diagnosis of this nervous system involvement in the context of Addison’s disease
is discussed.
Conclusion
Up to 60% of adolescent and young adult men with ADL/AMN have no or few
neurologic abnormalities at the time of diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency. The
cerebello-brainstem form of AMN can be a rare presentation of ALD. ADL/AMN
should be considered in any boy or young man with adrenal insufficiency and
neurological signs, albeit atypical.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP256
EP257
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in human immunodeficiency virus
infected men: uncommonly low testosterone levels
Ana Coelho Gomes1, José Maria Aragués1, Sílvia Guerra1,
Joana Fernandes2, Luís dos Santos Pinheiro3 & Mário Rui Mascarenhas1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Hospital de Santa
Maria, Lisbon, Portugal;2Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital de
Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal;3Department of Medicine, Hospital de Santa
Maria, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
Hypogonadism is common and occurs prematurely in human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)-infected men, being hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) more
frequent. However, HH with very low testosterone has not been described. We
present  three  HIV-infected  men  with  severe  HH  and  normal  pubertal
development.
Case report
Three HIV-infected men, with HIV-1 diagnosis at the ages of 22, 34 and 35 years.
Two of them had depressive syndrome, one treated with escitalopram and the
other with mirtazapine. The one diagnosed with HIV when he was 22 started
antiretroviral drugs (protease inhibitor and reverse-transcriptase inhibitors) at the
age of 25 and seven years later complained of decreased libido, unejaculation and
erectile  dysfunction.  The  second  one  presented  with  decreased  libido,
unejaculation and hair loss in androgen-dependent areas 6 months after the
HIV  diagnosis.  The  third  started  antiretroviral  drugs
(reverse-transcriptase
inhibitors) at the time of HIV diagnosis and 1 year later referred anejaculation
and decreased libido. Laboratory tests revealed HH in all of them (FSH 1.48 and
0.7 U/l; LH 0.46, !0.12 and !0.07 U/l; total testosterone 24.2, !10 and
37 ng/dl and free testosterone 0.66 and 0.46 pg/ml). Prolactin, estradiol, the
other pituitary axis and the sellar and head computed tomography scan were
normal. All had normal CD4 count at the time of HH diagnosis. They started
testosterone replacement therapy, with testosterone normalization and symptoms
improvement.
Conclusions
Causes of HH in HIV-infected men include undernutrition, severe illness, drugs
(psychotropics, opiates, megestrol acetate or steroids), pituitary dysfunction and
co-morbid conditions, as antibody to hepatitis C virus seropositivity and injection
drug use. Despite having none of these features (except two patients that were
treated with low-dose psychotropics), our patients had HH with uncommonly low
testosterone. This suggests that a different mechanism could contribute to severe
HH in HIV-infected men. Screening for hypogonadism in all HIV-infected men
might help to understand its etiology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP257
EP258
Thyrotoxicosis leading to adrenal crises reveals primary bilateral
adrenal lymphoma - case report
Catarina Roque, Ricardo Fonseca, Carlos Bello, Francisco Sousa Santos,
Ricardo Capita˜o & Carlos Vasconcelos
Hospital de Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction
Amiodarone use may be associated with secondary severe organ dysfunction.
Thyrotoxicosis develops in 15% cases. Primary bilateral adrenal lymphoma is a
rare malignancy. If frequently presents bilaterally and with symptoms of adrenal
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
insufficiency. Symptomatology for both conditions is nonspecific, especially in
the elderly, and a high suspicion index is necessary for appropriate diagnosis.
Case report
A 78 year old female presented to the emergency department due to confusion,
nausea and vomiting. She had history of Diabetes Mellitus, Hypertension and
atrial fibrillation. She had been recently treated for urinary infection associated
with vomiting and acute hypochloremic hyponatemia. Leucocyturia persisted and
due to TSH 0.01 mU/ml, fT4 68 (10-18) pmol/l, fT3 6.34 (4-8) pmol/l, the patient
was  admitted  to  the  Endocrinology  ward.  Further  evaluation  supported
amiodarone-induced type  2 thyroiditis. Despite appropriate therapy, thyroid
function  further  aggravated.  She  synchronously  developed  a  septic  state
associated with nosocomial pneumonia. Hemodynamic instability, hyponatremia,
hypoglycemia and vomiting raised the suspicion of concomitant adrenocortical
insufficiency. Fluid resuscitation and hydrocortisone led to clinical improvement,
with high dose glucocorticoid requirements. Adrenal insufficiency was admitted.
Abdominal echography showed right and left justa-renal heterogeneous solid
nodules (6.6 and 7 cm respectively) and left pleural effusion. Fluid analyses was
negative  for  malignant  cells.  Thoracoabdominal  contrasted-tomography
suggested an endobronchic primary, also suspected during bronchofibroscopy,
with hepatic and adrenal secondary deposits. The left mass compressed the ureter
and  seemed  to  penetrate  the  kidney  and  vascular  structures.
24 h-Urinary
metanephirnes were normal but the adrenals were not accessible to biopsy. After a
period of seemingly favourable evolution the patient died. Autopsy confirmed
primary adrenal non-hodgkin lymphoma.
Conclusion
Primary adrenal lymphoma is a rare cause of adrenal insufficiency but progression
is often fast and fatal. This entity must integrate the differential diagnosis,
especially in the elderly patient.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP258
EP259
Multiple endocrine dysfunctions in a patient with secondary
hemochromatosis
Ibtissem Oueslati, Emna Elfeleh, Nadia Mchirgui, Najla Bchir,
Karima Khiari & Néjib Ben Abdallah
Department of Endocrinology, Charles Nicolle University Hospital, Tunis,
Tunisia.
Introduction
Hemochromatosis is a disorder caused by an excess of iron deposition in the
parenchymal cells that leads to organ dysfunction. In patients with secondary
hemochromatosis due to multiple blood transfusions, endocrinopathies such as
diabetes mellitus, hypopituitarism frequently develop.
Herein we report the case of a patient with B-thalassemia major who developed
diabetes  mellitus,  hypopituitarism  and  primary  hypoparathyroidism  due  to
secondary hemochromatosis.
Case report
A 27-year-old  male  patient  was  diagnosed  at  the  age  of
4
years  with
hemochromatosis secondary to multiple transfusions for B-thalassemia major.
At the age of 19 years, he developed diabetes mellitus and hypopituitarism with
hypogonadotropic  hypogonadism  and  corticotropin  deficiency.  MRI showed
hemosiderin deposits in anterior pituitary gland.
He received insulin, hydrocortisone and testosterone enanthate. One year later, he
was diagnosed as having iron-overload cardiomyopathy and hepatic cirrhosis.
At the age of 27 years, the patient presented with a weakness. On physical
examination, he had a body weight of 56 kg, a body mass index of 17.2 kg/m2, a
blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg and a pulse rate of 75 per mn. Laboratory tests
indicated a central hypothyroidism with a TSH of 3.94 mIU/ml and FT4 of
0.66 ng/ml and a hypoparathyroidism with hypocalcemia (corrected calcemia of
2.05 mmol/l), hyperphosphatemia (1.91 mmol/l) and low PTH level (13.3 pg/ml).
He was treated with levothyroxine and 1 a hydroxyvitamin D3.
Conclusion
Patients with secondary hemochromatosis due to repeated transfusions may
develop irreversible multiple endocrine failures. Therefore, a regular use of
chelation therapy and a follow up with repeated screening examinations are
necessary in patients with multiple transfusions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP259
EP260
Severe hyperkalemia and unmasking of renal disease following
adrenalectomy for aldosteronoma
Affan Tahir, Kevin McLaughlin & Gregory Kline
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.
Severe hyperkalemia post adrenalectomy is documented in the literature but not
actively sought after in high risk post-operative patients.
Case
Fifty-one  year  old  woman  with  a
12
year  history  of  hypertension  and
hypokalemia.  Her  BP  was  controlled  with  amlodipine
10 mg  OD.  Serum
aldosterone  was
2832 pmol/l  with  undetectable  renin  activity  leading  to
aldosterone to renin ratio (ARR) O28 000 pmol/l per ng/ml per h. Creatinine
was 75 mmol/l with eGFR of 85 ml/min. CT showed a 3.5 cm low density left
adrenal  mass  and  adrenal  vein  sampling  confirmed  left  lateralization.  She
underwent left adrenalectomy. At the time of discharge serum creatinine was
71 umol/l, with potassium of 3.8 and eGFR of 85 ml/min. Her serum aldosterone
was !70 pmol/l and renin activity of 0.36 ng/ml per h yielding ARR !194. She
was readmitted after 3 months with potassium of 6.7 and serum creatinine of 154.
She was started on fludrocortisone and her creatinine dropped to 123 with
improvement in potassium of 5.2. On discontinuing fludrocortisone after 4 months
her serum creatinine rose again and reached a new baseline level of 180 mmol/l,
eGFR 28 ml/min.
Discussion
While overt pre-existing renal impairment may be a strong factor in predicting
post-operative hyperkalemia. Evidence suggests that PA itself may induce a
hyper-filtration injury that may mask renal impairment until the operative reversal
of the phenomenon.
Conclusion
Hyperkalemia screening should be actively considered in high risk patients. Older
age  (O53),  longer  duration  of  hypertension
(O10 years),  impaired  pre-op
(!58 ml/min) and post-op GFR and higher levels of pre-op aldosterone and are
all known risk factors. The long term cure of primary hyperaldosteronism and
hypertension is expected to yield renal benefits but development of irreversible
post adrenalectomy renal impairment after a long duration of hypertension may
argue for earlier consideration of a PA diagnosis in hypertensive populations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP260
EP261
Hypopituitarism in a phenotypically Turner-like female with 45X/46
XY karyotype
Ibtissem Oueslati, Karima Khiari, Najla Bchir, Nadia Mchirgui &
Néjib Ben Abdallah
Department of Endocrinology, Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis with 45X/46XY mosaicism is considered to be a rare
disorder of sex development. This condition is characterized by a phenotypically
very heterogeneous clinical presentation. In fact, the individuals with 45X/46XY
mosaicism ranged from phenotypically normal men with azoospermia, going
through individuals with genital ambiguity, to women with Turner syndrome.
Herein,  we  describe  a  phenotypically  Turner-like  female  with
45X/46XY
mosaicism with coexisting hypopituitarism.
Case report
A 20-year-old female patient was referred to our department for short stature and
primary amenorrhea. On examination, she had a body weight of 44 kg, a height of
138 cm (!K4S.D.), a body mass index of 23.1 kg/m2, a round face with a low
posterior hairlines and multiple cutaneous nevi. She had a female phenotype with
female external genitalia (Tanner stage: B3 P2 A1). Her bone age was delayed.
Laboratory  tests  revealed  a  hypergonadotropic  hypogonadism
(FSHZ
115 mIU/ml,  LHZ38.33 mIU/ml,  oestradiol
!9 pg/ml),  a  normal  thyroid
function and a normal prolactin level. L dopa stimulating test showed growth
hormone deficiency (peak GHZ3.89 ng/ml) and insulin-induced hypoglycemia
test confirmed GH and corticotropin deficiency.
Pelvic ultrasonography and MRI scan showed a hypoplastic uterus with no
visualized ovaries. Pituitary MRI scan was normal. Echocardiography and renal
sonography revealed no abnormalities. Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood
revealed a karyotype with mos 45, X (18%)/46, XY (82%).
Patient  was  put  on  hormone  replacement  therapy.  Laparoscopy  showed
apparently complete Mullerian structure with streak gonads. Bilateral prophy-
lactic gonadectomy was performed.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
The coexisting of Turner syndrome and hypopituitarism has rarely been reported.
GH deficiency should be considered when the short stature is lower than that
usually found in Turner syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP261
EP262
Left adrenal Ectopic cushing syndrome even more challenging
Betina Biagetti, Olga Simó, Angel Ortiz, Carmela Iglesias, Belen Dalama,
Gabriel Obiols, Joan Castell-Conesa, Amparo Gracia-Burillo, Enric Caubet
& Jordi Mesa
Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
Background
The Ectopic ACTH Syndromes (EAS) often associated with severe hypercorti-
solism are really a challenge.
Case presentation
We report the case of a 48-year-old woman, newly diagnosed with hypertension,
hypokalemia despite renin-angiotensin blockers intake, and complaints of intense
fatigue, muscular weakness, and easy bruising, which worse in four months. EAS
was biochemically confirmed, but two urinary catecholamines collection were
negatives despite a left adrenal topography in all image studies included MIBG
was  found.  The  patient  dramatically  worse  after  lanreotide  treatment,  we
hypothesize, the lack of response to somatostatin analogues could be explained
because of the extremely high hypercortisolism that downregulate somatostatin
receptor type 2 expression, so after ketoconazole therapy and cortisol normal-
ization, we repeat SSRS scan, but we do not find any change. Finally adrenal left
gland  and  an  associated  extra  adrenal  ganglioneuroma  were  removed.
Surprisingly only the adrenal gland had significant staining of ACTH. After
removal,  blood  pressure  was  normalized  without  pills,  hypercortisolemic
parameters and the clinical symptoms were resolved.
Conclusion
We highlight surgery, if is feasible, in EAS, is ever the best choice and can be
curative. Regarding pharmacological options we emphasized glucocorticoids can
decrease the somatostatin receptor type 2, expression in tumor, with diagnostic
and treatment implications. Finally we propose68Gallium-SSTR-PET/CT, and
pasireotide with somatostatin receptor type 5 affinity, could be better diagnostic
and treatment alternatives in patients with very high cortisol levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP262
EP263
Cushing’s disease - medical chameleon - case report of the patient with
cyclic, ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome due to atypical pituitary
macroadenoma
Joanna Malicka, Marta Dudzinska, Maria Kurowska & Jerzy S Tarach
Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland.
Introduction
ACTH-secreting macroadenomas account for about 4-10% of Cushing’s disease
and are often resistant to surgical treatment and radiotherapy. The aim of the study
was to present diagnostic and therapeutic difficulties in a case of cyclic recurrent
ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome due to atypical pituitary adenoma.
Case report
50-year-old man with visceral obesity was referred to hospital because of poor
control of diabetes and high blood pressure. On the basis of clinical symptoms and
severe hypokaliemia hypercortisolemia was suspected and laboratory test were
performed.  They  confirmed  ACTH-dependent  Cushing’s  syndrome
(plasma
cortisolZ46.6 mg/dl (range 4.3-22.4); ACTHZ176 pg/ml (4.7-48.6); urine daily
cortisol excretionZ15 870 mg (range 285-213.7)]. Further investigations did not
show any pathology of the pituitary or another tumor responsible for ectopic
ACTH syndrome. Between 08.2007 and 03.2008 the patient received inhibitors of
steroidogenesis. The loose of weight (30 kg), normalization of cortisol level and
significant improvement of patient’s well-being were observed. The treatment has
been withdrawn. During further follow-up of the patient there were periodically
repeated periods of moderate subclinical hypercortisolemia, observed mainly in
spring and autumn. In spring 2013, significant clinical and laboratory signs of
hypercortisolemia appeared and MRI revealed pituitary macroadenoma (15!
13!15 mm). In 09.2013 the patient underwent transsphenoidal surgery (atypical
sparsely  granulated  coricotroph  adenoma,  ACTH
(C),  MIB1O20%).  Post-
operative MRI did not show tumor remnant, but moderate hypercortisolemia was
present. The patient was disqualified from a second surgery, in 04.2015 he
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
received stereotactic radiotherapy. Since November 2015 the patient is being
treated with pasireotide because of persistent hypercortisolemia.
Conclusions
The  authors  present  long-term  difficulties  in  establishing  the  diagnosis  of
Cushing’s disease, mainly because of cyclic nature, long period of remission and
diagnostic limitations in finding the source of ACTH excess. Delay in diagnosis of
Cushing’s disease leads to worse effects of treatment and the need to search for
new therapeutic approaches.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP263
EP264
The endocrine trifecta: rarer presentation of a rare disease
Uzma Khan, Ahmed Al-Sharefi, Paul Peter, Shafie Kamaruddin,
Giridhar Tarigopula & Praveen Partha
County Durham & Darlington NHS Foundation Trust, Darlington,
Durham, UK.
Introduction
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 is a rare disease characterized by
the presence of autoimmune Addison’s disease in combination with thyroid
autoimmune disease and/or type 1 diabetes mellitus, and possible occurrence of
other autoimmune non-endocrine disorders. The combination of the three glands
diseases is even rarer and is referred to as Carpenter’s syndrome.
A long time interval is often present between the manifestations of the first to
second/third component of the disease which may reach years and decades and it
is unusual to find simultaneous occurrence of two or more glands disorders.
Case report
We present here a case of 47 years old British woman who was admitted with
hyponatremia  and  significant postural  hypotension  and was  subsequently
confirmed to have Addison’s disease. Upon starting her on steroids replacement,
she was re-admitted within 3 weeks with non-ketotic hyperglycaemia where an
underlying autoimmune diabetes was confirmed. Subsequently she was found to
have  an  autoimmune  subclinical  hypothyroidism,  fulfilling  the  criteria  of
Carpenter’s syndrome. We believe that the long standing cortisol deficiency in
our patient had masked her underlying autoimmune diabetes and prevented her
from having marked hyperglycaemia which was only spotted upon replacing her
with glucocorticoids.
Conclusion
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 is a rare entity, but can lead to
serious life-threatening problems if not identified and treated early, so a high
index of suspicion is required.
Carpenter’s syndrome is rare and only few cases have been reported in literature.
Our case to the best of our knowledge is singular as the syndrome manifested with
all the features presenting almost simultaneously within a short time span.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP264
EP265
Late complications in a man with poorly controlled congenital adrenal
hyperplasia - case report
Katarzyna Maliszewska, Irina Kowalska, Anna Poplawska-Kita &
Maria Gorska
Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
Introduction
We report a case of CAH who developed several complications due to poor
control. Proper diagnosis and treatment can enable men with the disease to have a
normal life and fertility. Case report 39-year-old patient with a history of primary
adrenal insufficiency was admitted to our department because of infertility.
Semen analysis performed prior to hospitalization showed azoospermia. The
patient did not have medical documentation regarding his disease and was not
able to explain exactly why the glucocorticoid therapy was initiated. In referral
letter to the hospital, Addison’s disease was written in the diagnosis. We learned
from parents, that hydrocortisone was introduced after life-threatening episode in
the neonatal period and maintained untill now. The study examination revealed
dark complexion and brown spots on mucous membranes, livid lips, and enlarged
testes with palpable nodules. Laboratory studies have shown: increased level of
RBC, hyperlipidemia, high values of ACTH (O1250 pg/ml) and testosterone
(O15 ng/ml)  and  low  concentrations  of  gonadotropins.  After
2
days  of
hydrocortison withdrawal, cosyntropin test was performed revealing impaired
cortisol  response.  Moreover,  basal  level  of
27-OH  progesterone  and  after
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
cosyntropin stimulation was very high. The abdominal computed tomography
scan revealed grossly enlarged and heterogeneous adrenal glands (right 39!71!
70 mm, left 38!89!110 mm). They showed progression comparing to previous
CT. Ultrasonography of the testes revealed variable echogenicity. The tumor
markers (CEA, a-FP, b-HCG) were negative. Biopsy of testes was performed.
Urinary steroid profiling was performed to confirm the salt wasting form of CAH.
In the treatment 0.5 mg of dexametasone was introduced.
Conclusion
This case illustrates that congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase
deficiency can progress to chronic complications. Children with CAH require
regular screening for complications and metabolic sequelae. It is desirable for all
men with CAH to have a testicular ultrasound and routine semen analysis.
Patients and their relatives should be well educated and informed about disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP265
EP266
Insulin-mediated pseudoacromegaly with nonfunctioning pituitary
adenoma
Mehmet Celik, Semra Ayturk, Buket Yilmaz Bulbul & Sibel Guldiken
Trakya University Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolizm, Edirne, Turkey.
Pseudoacromegaly is a rare disorder characterized by cutaneous manifestations of
growth hormone excess but with normal growth hormone levels or IGF-1. This
condition  described  in  patients  with  insulin  resistance,  hypothyroidism,
pachydermoperiostitis and drug intake such as minoxidil. The hyperinsulinaemia
impaired metabolic signalling may activate intact mitogenic signalling pathways
and stimulate pathological tissue growth.
A 41-year-old man presented with acral enlargement and excessive sweating. On
physical examination He was tall (190 cm) and weighed 110 kg. His hands and
feet were sweaty and enlarged. Skin tags and acanthosis nigricans of axilla,
prognathism, acne were seen on examination. Serum GH:0.05 ng/ml (n:0-8.6),
IGF-1: 115 ng/ml (n:101-267), prolactin:10 ng/ml (n:2.1-17.7), TSH: 1,3 uIU/ml
(n:0.55-4.78) and other pituitary hormon levels were normal. After overnight
1 mg dexamethasone suppression test cortisol level was 0.8 mg/dl (n!1.8).
Insulin like growth factor binding protein-3 was also normal. The fasting glucose
levels were 102 mg/dl (n:70-105), fasting insulin levels were 78.2 mU/l (n:3-25).
HOMA-IR: 19.6. GH level was suppressed after 75 g oral glucose test. Pituitary
magnetic  resonance  imaging  revealed  intrasellar  mass  lesion
3!4!4 mm
microadenoma, in the left part of pituitary gland, believed to be non-secretory
with normal pituitary hormonal workup. The patient did not approve of any
pituitary  surgery,  admited  metformin
1000 mg  twice  daily  and  has  been
followed up.
This is a rare case of pseudoacromagely with nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma.
Physicians should be aware while evaluating patients with similar clinical and
laboratory features.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP266
EP267
«Clinically silent» somatotropinoma
Anna Lipatenkova, Larisa Dzeranova, Ekaterina Pigarova &
Andrey Grigoriev
Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Somatotropinomas  are  typically  recognized  when  GH  excessively  secretion
causes  acromegaly.
«Silent»  somatotroph  adenomas
(immunohistochemical
evidence of GH excess without biochemical or clinical evidence) and «clinically
silent» somatotroph adenomas (immunohistochemical and biochemical evidence
without  clinical  evidence)  have  occasionally  been  reported.  The  relative
frequency of each presentation is unknown.
The aim is to describe the clinical course of a patient with clinically silent
somatotroph adenoma.
Case presentation
In a female patient disease presented at the age of 22 years with oligomenorrhea
and hyperprolactinemia - PRL 881.37 mU/l (127-637) for which she received
cabergoline
0.25 mg  per  week  with  induction  of  normoprolactinemia  and
normalization of menstrual cycle. Within a year MRI revealed endo-suprasellar
pituitary adenoma 16!15!13 mm, without chiasm compression. The levels of
TSH, cortisol, LH, FSH, prolactin were in normal ranges. These changes were
regarded  as  nonfunctioning  pituitary  adenoma  and  annual  follow-up  was
recommended. Subsequent MRIs showed an enlargement (21!18!17 mm),
mainly  due  to  suprasellar  component  without  chiasm  involvement.  ACTH,
cortisol, PRL, LH, FSH were within reference ranges and a decrease of free T4
8.1 pmol/l (9-20) and IGF-1 elevation 816.9 ng/ml (128-315) were noted. The
high  fasting  GH  levels  confirmed  biochemical  acromegaly  as  at  physical
examination there were no clinical signs of this disease. Transsphenoidal surgery
was performed and immunohistochemical staining showed that tumor cells were
strongly reactive to GH and relatively mildly reactive to PRL, with ki-67 2%
confirming the presence of clinically «silent» somatotropinoma. After 3, 6, 12
months after the surgery the levels of IGF-1 remain in normal ranges. The brain
MRI was repeated after 12 months thereafter with no signs of adenoma.
Conclusion
This case demonstrates the need to perform an extensive hormonal testing for all
patients with presumably non-active pituitary adenoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP267
EP268
Delayed diagnosis of isolated postpartum TSH deficiency: Sheehan’s
syndrome or lymphocytic hypophysitis?
Pascu Iuliana1, Betivoiu Minodora1, Nila Alexandra1, Martin Sorina1,2 &
Fica Simona1,2
1Elias Hospital, Endocrinology Department, Bucharest, Romania;2Carol
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Endocrinology Department,
Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Sheehan’s syndrome (SS) is a rare complication of postpartum hemorrhage
resulting in varying degrees of pituitary insufficiency. The diagnosis of SS has
often been overlooked and thus delayed for many years due to its nonspecific
signs and symptoms. Lymphocytic hypophysitis (LL) is also an uncommon
autoimmune disorder that has to be suspected in women with recent delivery
presenting with changes of one or more pituitary hormone secretions, especially
when associated with other autoimmune endocrine or non-endocrine disorders.
Case report
We report the case of a 33-year-old female who presented to our clinic in August
2012 with complaints of fatigue, depression, impaired memory, bradipsychia,
upper and lower limbs paresthesias. In October 2010 the patient had severe
postpartum hemorrhage with headache, lactation failure and oligomenorrhea.
Physical examination at admission: BMIZ26 kg/m2, dry skin, cold extremities,
bradycardia (50/min), low blood pressureZ90/60 mmHg. Laboratory results:
TSHZ1.28 mIU/ml,  TT3!40.0 ng/dl,  FT4!0.30 ng/dl,  TPOAbZ67.6I U/ml
(n!35 IU/ml), 8:00 h plasma cortisolZ10.1 mg/dl with normal increment after
Synachtene  retard  stimulation  test,  ACTHZ12.7 pg/ml,  FSHZ4.53 mIU/ml,
LHZ1.94 mIU/ml, estradiolZ38.26 pg/ml, ProlactinZ6.45 ng/ml, IGF1Z167.3
ng/ml (80-277 ng/ml). Thyroid ultrasound revealed diffuse glandular enlarge-
ment with heterogeneous and hypoechoic parenchymal echo pattern that together
with the TPOAb levels supported the diagnosis of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT).
Pituitary MRI showed empty-sella. The pituitary stalk was slightly thickened and
deviated. No pituitary tumors were detected. The patient was diagnosed with TSH
insufficiency and HT and replacement treatment with levothyroxine was started.
The follow up was favorable, without functionally progress to combined pituitary
dysfunction. In 2014 the patient uneventfully gave birth to a second child.
Conclusions
We present the case of a young women diagnosed at 2 years postpartum with
isolated TSH deficiency and chronic autoimmune thyroiditis. Long-term follow-
up is mandatory because although the severe postpartum hemorrhage and the
empty sella suggest SS the association with HT may rise the suspicion of a LL.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP268
EP269
Pregnancy in patient with GH secreting pituitary adenoma: a case
report
Robertas Knispelis2, Kristina Lebedevaite3, Jurate Lasiene2,
Birute Zilaitiene1,2 & Rasa Verkauskiene1,2
1Institute of Endocrinology, Medical Academy, Lithuanian University of
Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania;2Department of Endocrinology,
Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania;
3Faculty of Medicine, Medical Academy, Lithuanian University of Health
Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
GH producing pituitary adenomas are associated with infertility. Hereby the first
case  in  Lithuania,  when  acromegaly  patient  got  pregnant  and  delivered  is
reported.
Case presentation
33-year-old woman visited endocrinologist complaining of secondary amenor-
rhoea. Due to elevated prolactin - 3016 mU/l (NR!418), bromcriptine treatment
was started. The patient discontinued treatment after three months because of
restoration of regular menstrual cycle and dropped out from follow-up. Four years
later the patient visited our hospital having complaints of typical acromegaly
symptoms. Her IGF-1 was 150.7 nmol/l (x3 ULN). Pituitary MRI disclosed a
macroadenoma  1.6!1.2!0.6 cm.  Total  macroadenoma’s  removal  was  not
possible, because of invasion into left cavernous sinus, there was no visual
impairment, so the patient was enrolled into the III phase clinical trial and treated
with subcutaneous injections of study drug (dopamine-somatostatine chimeric
molecule). Due to insufficient effect, treatment was discontinued. One month later
IGF-1 was 846.9 ng/ml (x3.4 ULN). Transsphenoidal resection of adenoma was
performed, pathological examination confirmed GH/TSH secreting cells. Three
months later, treatment with somatostatin analogues was started due to GH and
IGF-1 hypersecretion and continued for 280 days, giving Lanreotide 120mg every
56 days for the last three injections. When patient came for fourth Lantreotide
dose, she was pregnant for 6 weeks and treatment was discontinued. Normal fetal
growth and development was observed, with no maternal complications. The
patient delivered a full-term 4060 g weight, 52 cm height new-born and APGAR
9-10 points by caesarean section. Lanreotide therapy was restarted in three
months. Seven months after delivery MRI scan disclosed reduced adenoma size,
hormone levels decreased as well.
Conclusion
The case of successful pregnancy in patient with active GH secreting adenoma,
treated  with  Lanreotide,  is presented. Only a  few such  cases  are reported
worldwide. Although lanreotide is assigned to category C by FDA, no pregnancy
complications were observed in our case.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP269
EP270
Differential diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency in a patient with APS
syndrome and Rosai-Dorfman disease
Ines Bilic-Curcic1,2, Marija Tripolski2 & Tatjana Bacun1,2
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia;2University
Hospital Center Osijek, Osijek, Croatia.
Primary adrenal insufficiency could be a rare manifestation of antiphospholipid
syndrome (APS) and may be a consequence of bilateral adrenal hemorrhage.
Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD) is sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadeno-
pathy, a rare histiocytic proliferative disorder with a distinctive microscopic
appearance. The retro-peritoneum is an infrequent site of involvement as well as
extranodal sites.
We report a case of a 39-year-old female patient with diagnosed APS 3 years ago
treated  with  anticoagulant  therapy  and  glucocorticoids  who  presented  with
fatigue, loss of appetite and abdominal cramps. One-year prior admission an
abdominal ultrasound showed acalculose cholecystitis along with lymphadeno-
pathy and a right adrenal gland enlargement 3 cm in diameter, while left was
described as normal. At the time of admission primary adrenal insufficiency was
diagnosed while other hormone tests were normal and prednisone was replaced
with hydrocortisone. In the mean time abdominal CT revealed again acalculose
cholecystitis  but  now  both  adrenal  glands  were  enlarged  and  hypodensly
structured, left 2.6!3.9, right 3.8!1.8 cm with numerous enlarged lymph nodes
in the area of hepatoduodenal ligament largest being 3.3 cm in diameter. Surgical
removal of gallbladder was performed along with extirpation of lymph nodes and
patohistological finding showed sinus histiocytosis. Postoperative synacthen test
indicated low basal cortisol production with no response to stimulation and
hydrocortisone therapy was continued.
Differential diagnosis included adrenal hemorrhage associated with APS or RDD
which can be associated with APS (only two cases reported presently) but
retroperitoneal location is extremely rare let alone extranodal sites. However,
since CT imaging characteristics showed no signs of hemorrhage, thrombosis or
embolism of adrenal glands, it is entirely possible that bilateral enlargement
and adrenal insufficiency was a result of sinus histiocytosis infiltration as a sign
of RDD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP270
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP271
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in an acromegalic patient
Reyhan Ersoy1, Neslihan Cuhaci1, Sule Mine Bakanay Ozturk2, Ali Tam1,
Imdat Dilek2 & Bekir Cakir1
1Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University School of Medicine, Department of Haematology, Ankara,
Turkey.
Introduction
Acromegaly patients are known to have an increased risk of malignancies. This
may be as a result of the effect of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) on cellular
proliferation and apoptosis inhibition. Although there are various reports related
with hematological malignancies in children who treated with growth hormone
(GH), few data are available about hematological malignancies in acromegaly
patients. Here, we report a patient with acromegaly who has been developed
chronic lypmhocytic leukemia (CLL) in the follow-up period.
Case
A 30-year-old woman who was at 25th weeks gestation were consulted for
gestational diabetes mellitus 9 years ago. Physical examination, random GH, IGF-
I levels and glucose suppression test results were consistent with acromegaly. She
reached full term without treatment and had a caesarian section and delivered a
4200-gr-baby boy with Apgar score of 9. After 1 year delivery transsphenoidal
surgery was performed and 3 months after the operation long-acting somatostatin
analog treatment was begun. Since she had residual adenoma and biochemical
remission was not achieved with medical treatment, she had underwent second
operation after 1 year later the first surgery. Since the remission was not achieved
despite the medical treatment, after 1 year later the second operation gamma-
knife therapy has been performed. After 5 years later the radiotherapy, GH and
IGF-I levels were decreased gradually, somatostatin therapy was lowered and
finally discontinued. However, the patient had progressive leukocytosis with 90%
lymphocytes. Flowcytometric analysis of the peripheral blood was consisted with
CD5C, CD19C, CD20C, CD22C, CD79bC, CD43C, CD200C lymphocytes
with surface anti-kappa monoclonality. Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis
of bone marrow aspiration revealed 20% deletion 17p13.1(TP53). Her findings
were consistent with CLL-stage II.
Conclusion
Occurrence of CLL in the course of acromegaly may have been caused by
excessive endogenous GH or may be a coincidental situation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP271
EP272
Diagnostic challenges in severe primary hyperaldosteronism
Michiel Nijhoff, Natasha Appelman-Dijkstra & Alberto Pereira
LUMC, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology,
Leiden, The Netherlands.
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is generally caused by an adenoma or adrenal
hyperplasia. To discern between these two, selective adrenal vein sampling
(AVS) is necessary. Adequate interpretation requires that RAAS-interfering
medication be withdrawn. We report a patient with severe PA, where it was not
possible to safely withdraw RAAS-interfering medication.
Case
A 37-year-old male was referred for AVS. He had documented PA and bilateral
adrenal adenomas on CT-abdomen. Previous attempts to withdraw medication
had led to hypokalaemia (despite supplementation) and hypertensive crisis.
Medication included spironolactone (up to 400 mg), barnidipine, doxazosine,
metoprolol, and potassium. The patient complained of aggressiveness and sexual
dysfunction. Blood pressure was 150/110 mmHg. Since AVS was required,
RAAS-interfering medication was carefully withdrawn. Subsequently, potassium
requirement increased to 400 mmol/day. Blood pressure medication consisted of
doxazosine 16 mg, verapamil 240 mg and hydralazine 200 mg. Ten days before
AVS, the patient presented with hypertension (185/110), headache and blurry
vision. Enalapril was added and renin concentration monitored. Baseline renin
was 3.81 mU/l, after titration to enalapril 40 mg/day it was 4.10 mU/l. Blood
pressure decreased to 160/90 mmHg. AVS demonstrated a right-sided source.
After surgery, the patient recovered uneventfully and was normotensive and
normokalemic  without  medication.  Two  months  later  blood  pressure  was
135/88 mmHg with Lisinopril 10 mg/day; aldosterone concentration was low.
The patient’s symptoms had resolved.
Conclusion
Even in severe PA, it is worthwhile to withdraw RAAS-interfering medication
and perform AVS, so that surgical curation remains possible. If RAAS-interfering
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
medication cannot be withdrawn, then renin (activity) should be monitored;
diagnostic procedures can be interpreted reliably if this remains suppressed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP272
EP273
Addison’s disease caused by adrenal gland tuberculosis
Antonela Sabati Rajic1, Maja Ivartnik Merkac2 & Petra Svetina3
1Department of Endocrinology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia;2SB Slovenj Gradec, Slovenj Gradec, Slovenia;
3University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases Golnik, Golnik,
Slovenia.
Addison’s disease (primary adrenal cortical failure) is the lack of glucocorticoids
due to disease of  the adrenal  gland. At
1855, when Addison described  it
tuberculosis (TB) was the main etiology. May be we are coming to that time. TB
is  an  infectious  disease  caused  by  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis.  The  most
commonly (third of the patients) affects the lungs, as well as the other organs.
Symptoms of the disease are non specific and are deteriorating slowly, so the
disease is often overlooked, or not recognized until comes to infection or another
stressful situation of the body.
51-year old women with a functional right kidney, after cholecystectomy was first
time admitted in the hospital due to the upper urinary tract infections and renal
failure. She was treated with ciprofloxacin. Then she suffered from severe
headache, nausea and vomiting. She passed lumbar puncture. Cerebrospinal fluid
exam was typical for serous lymphocytic meningitis. At the same time mild
hyperkalemia (6.0 mmol/L) and hyponatremia (132 mmol/L) were diagnosed and
treated symptomatically. In the next two months she felt worse, lose about 30 kg.
The laboratory exams confirmed the failure of the adrenals.
The clinical signs were masked because the women is the Roma ethnicity and
with  hyperpigmented  skin.  We  found  even  primary  hypothyroidism.  The
treatment with hydrocortisone and levotiroxine started. The abdominal CT-scan
showed small adrenals with microcalcinations. We preformed US-guided fine
needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy of the adrenals, because the other tests for TB
were negative. The PCR diagnostics for TB in the FNA biopsy sample was
positive and confirmed suspected adrenal TB. She started with treatment for TB.
TB is becoming one of the infections of the developed world we have to think
about, because of the migrations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP273
EP274
Hereditary Pheocromocytoma-Paraganglioma Syndrome: a case report
M. Teresa Gallego, Lucia Vera, Amparo Meoro & Cristina Del Peso
Hospital Universitario Reina Sofia, Murcia, Spain.
Introduction
Paraganglioma
(PGL)  develops  from  cells  of  the  parasympathetic  and
sympathetic system. It usually manifests as a slow- growing and painless mass.
PGL may be hereditary, benign, malignant, unilateral or bilateral tumors. In most
cases PGL is located around the common carotid artery but may also be located
within the middle ear or in the abdomen. Non functional retroperitoneal PGL are
rare tumors, usually asymptomatic, and can attain big dimensions. Mutations in
the succinate dehydrogenase gene complex have been identified as a cause of
inherited Pheocromocytoma-Paraganglioma Syndrome (PGL/PCC). Malignant
PGL is a uncommon presentation diagnosed by local recurrence after total
resection of primary mass or findings of distant metastases.
Case report
A 47 years-old woman with a non functional retroperitoneal PGL. A large
pararenal tumor was removed completely. No distant metastases were found in
imaging studies. After a follow up period of 10 months the patient was in a good
health, asymptomatic, but a second operation was performed because of evidence
of tumor recurrence. After surgery the patient was treated with Radiotherapy.
Genetic analysis revealed succinate dehydrogenase B mutation in our patient (and
subsequently in two of her three children.)
Conclusions
The malignant potential of the PGL is determined by local invasion as well as
distant  metastases  as  there  are  no  characteristic  cellular  changes.  In
retroperitoneal PGL 50% are thought to be malignant. The SDHB mutation plays
an  important  role  in  malignant  PCC/PGL.  The  present  case  indicates  that
conducting genetic testing, including SDHB mutation analyses, is required to
determine the prognosis in patients highly suspected of having malignant tumors
in the context of a PGL/PCC Syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP274
EP275
A novel case of hypomagnesaemia secondary to fludrocortisone
Henry O’Connor, Doerthe Proske, Asma Batool & Jayadave Shakher
Birmingham Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
We present a case of fludrocortisone-induced hypomagnesaemia in a 27-year old
female with Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome Type1, manifesting as adrenal
insufficiency, hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism. Her medications were;
Alfalcidol 4 mcg; Levothyroxine 100 mcg; Hydrocortisone 20 mg bid; Fludro-
cortisone 200 mcg mane and 100 mcg nocte. The nocturnal dose of fludrocorti-
sone was started 4 months prior to her presentation. She presented with a history
of abdominal pain and carpopedal spasm. Her admission blood tests revealed
hypomagnesaemia, hypokalaemia and hypocalcaemia.
Blood result
Admission
Discharge (Day 3)
Magnesium
0.53
0.72
Potassium
3.1
3.2
Corrected Calcium
1.94
2.43
Ionised Calcium
0.88
N/A
She was treated with intravenous electrolyte replacement. There was a clear
temporal relation between the change in the dose of fludrocortisone and onset of
symptoms and there was no other dietary or pharmacological cause for her
hypomagnesaemia. An Ovid Medline search revealed no cases of fludrocortisone-
induced hypomagnesaemia though there are reported cases to FDA.
Magnesium, mainly an intracellular cation with serum concentration of 0.7-
1 mmol/l; 1% of total body magnesium(1) SPC does not mention hypomagne-
saemia as an adverse effect (2).
The likely mechanism of action is interference of renal handling of magnesium.
Approximately 80% of plasma magnesium is filtered through the glomerulus, the
majority reabsorbed via the paracellular route at the thick ascending limb of the
loop of Henley, dependent on electrical gradient across the membrane and 5-10%
is absorbed at the distal convoluted tubule via the transcellular route, dependant
on potassium secretion into the distal tubule to create a voltage gradient. The
distal reabsorption is physiologically important process in fine-tuning magnesium
balance and has been shown to be reduced in hypokalaemia (3). Fludrocortisone is
known to produce hypokalaemia through its effects in the distal convoluted
tubule.
Recommendation
We  propose that fludrocortisone causes  hypomagnesaemia  via reduction of
magnesium reabsorption at the distal convoluted tubule. We recommend that
serum  magnesium  and  calcium  be  checked  regularly  in  patients  taking
fludrocortisone, especially after a change in dosage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP275
EP276
The importance of early detection of Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN):
a case report
Marjeta Kermaj1, Dorina Ylli1, Anila Babameto2, Anisa Zeqja1,
Thanas Fureraj1, Ermira Muco3, Enalda Demaj1, Mirjeta Guni1 &
Agron Ylli1
1UHC ‘Mother Teresa’ Endocrinology Unit, Tirana, Albania;2UHC
‘Mother Teresa’ Genetic Unit, Tirana, Albania;3UHC ‘Mother Teresa’
Infectious Diseases Unit, Tirana, Albania.
Introduction
Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) is a form of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-
ALD) a rare inherited disorder (estimated prevalence 1:20 000 to 1:50 000)
characterized by the accumulation of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
affects mainly the nervous system white matter and the adrenal cortex and nearly
100% penetrance in males. Widely varying phenotypes and prognoses often
co-occur in a single kindred.
Methods
We report a case diagnosed at age 14 with idiopathic Morbus Addison. He was
treated with corticosteroid replacement therapy and was stabilized. At age 27 he
was hospitalized in neurology department with right coxo-femoral articulation
pain, walking difficulty, progressive weakness and stiffness of the legs and loss of
the ability to coordinate muscle movement. In laboratory evaluation routine
hemogram resulted normal. Brain and cervical spine MRI resulted normal. Nerve
conduction  tests  revealed  a  bilaterally  significant  increase  in  the  central
conduction time, four limbs electromyography examination resulted normal.
The neurologist diagnosis was a spastic paraparesis (sporadic form) in a subject
with morbus Addison. The patient married at age 25 and had 2 children a girl and
a boy. The case described above went undiagnosed for almost 10 years until he
was sent to our Endocrinology Department at age 37 with worsening of the
neurological symptoms. The diagnosis of AMN was established by elevated
plasma concentration of VLCFA C26:0, C24:0 and elevated ratio of C24/22 and
C26/22. After genetic  counseling, blood  samples of other  family members
(mother, sister, brother and children) have been sent for VLCFA analysis. Plasma
concentration of VLCFA of his mother, sister and daughter resulted elevated
(carriers of X-ALD) but his son and brother resulted normal.
Conclusion
Males with idiopathic primary adrenal insufficiency should be evaluated for
underlying ALD or AMN. Early diagnosis of AMN helps for detecting the
carriers, at-risk female relatives and to decide on prenatal testing for pregnancies
at increased risk.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP276
EP277
Difficulties of management of a VHL family
Adriana Gogoi1, Simona Jercalau1, Dan Hortopan1 & Corin Badiu1,2
1‘C.I. Parhon’ Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2‘Carol
Davila’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an inherited, autosomal dominant syndrome
manifested by a variety of benign and malignant tumors, with an incidence of
about 1 in 36 000 individuals and a mean age at presentation of 26 years.
We present a family (mother and daughter) case of possible type 2A VHL disease
diagnosed with multiple VHL-associated tumors in the absence of an available
genetic testing. They both presented in our clinic in 2013 with biochemical
profiles suggestive of pheochromocytoma (PHC). No genetic counseling was
giving to the mother.
Clinical cases
G.F, 54 y.o, F, first diagnosed with bilateral PHC at the age 13, with a second
bilateral PHC followed by a right adrenal tumor recurrence - each time a partial
adrenal resection. She presents retinal angiomas with blindness of the RE and
multiple hemangioblastomas of the cerebellum and spinal cord requiring seven
neurosurgical interventions for compressive tumors. On routine checking we
diagnosed a fourth right adrenal recurrence of PHC in addition to pancreatic
tumors. The patient chose to remain under chronic alpha and beta blockers
treatment.
Her daughter, 15 y.o, prematurely born at 7 months, was diagnosed with retinal
angiomas with blindness of the LE since 9 y.o., cataract and secondary glaucoma
of the RE. She was admitted at the age of 12 with sweating, palpitations, headache
and high BP- when a bilateral PHC was confirmed by CT scan- 2 right adrenal
tumors and a left adrenal tumor- and increased plasma NMN (2842/2205 pg/ml).
Surgical removal was performed (total left and subtotal right adrenalectomy). One
year after she developed a right adrenal recurrence which was again removed. She
is now under close surveillance at every 3 months.
Conclusions
The management of VHL disease needs a multidisciplinary strategy, the primary
goal being an early diagnosis and avoiding potential tumor-related disability.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP277
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP278
Hypopituitarism in the course of secondary hemochromatosis in a
patient with Diamond-Blackfan anemia
Beata Matyjaszek-Matuszek1, Anna Mieszkowska1, Monika
Lenart-Lipinska1,2, Iwona Ben-Skowronek3 & Jerzy Tarach1
1Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland;
2Department of Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University, Lublin,
Poland;3Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Medical
University, Lublin, Poland.
Introduction
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare, inherited normocytic or macrocytic
anemia due to aplasia of red cell lineage in the bone marrow. Patients with DBA
are diagnosed with a hypocellular bone marrow with a significant absence of
erythroid precursors typically in early childhood and require chronic treatment
with corticosteroids and frequent blood transfusions. Chronic blood transfusions
lead  to  iron-overload  injury  and  DBA  patients,  therefore,  require  lifelong
chelation therapy.
Case report
A 31-year old male patient with DBA diagnosed at the age of 8, maintained on
chronic blood transfusions repeated every 4 weeks since the age of 18 years and
iron chelation therapy (deferoxamine) with poor adherence, was admitted to the
Department of Endocrinology with suspected primary adrenal insufficiency.
Since several months the patient complained about weakness, fatigue, orthostatic
hypotension and hyperpigmentation of the skin. The clinical observation and the
morning plasma ACTH and cortisol levels excluded primary adrenal failure:
32 pg/ml (7.2-63), and 15.4 mg/dl (4.3-22.4), respectively. Further hormonal
assessments suggested hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: LH: 1.8 mIU/ml (1.5-
9.3); FSH: 2.8 mIU/ml (1.4-18.1); testosterone: 26 ng/dl (241-824) and the
growth hormone deficiency: GH: 0.44 ng/ml (0.03-2.47); IGF-1: 38 ng/ml (113-
202), probably in the course of secondary hemochromatosis: plasma Fe 211 ug/dl
(65-175), ferritin 5442 ng/ml (22-322), following blood transfusions. MRI of the
sella  turcica revealed a small pituitary gland with poor enhancement after
gadolinium injection, what might confirm iron deposits in this region.
Conclusion
Pituitary  dysfunction  following  secondary  hemochromatosis  should  be
considered in patients maintained on chronic blood therapy. Accurate evaluation
and long-term follow-up of all patients with iron over-load are necessary in order
to detect the occurrence of hypopituitarism, regardless of clinical evidence for
pituitary dysfunction. An adequate replacement therapy is necessary in order to
improve quality of life and outcomes in this group of patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP278
EP279
Addison disease in antiphospholipid syndrome - case report
Diana Oliveira, Sandra Paiva, Márcia Rodrigues, Daniela Guelho,
Luís Cardoso, Nuno Vicente, Diana Martins, Adriana Lages, Mara Ventura
& Francisco Carrilho
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department, Coimbra University
and Hospital Center, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Primary adrenal insufficiency or Addison disease (AD) is a potentially fatal
condition if not diagnosed in time. Rarely, it can arise as a manifestation of
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), caused by adrenal venous thrombosis and
consequent hemorrhagic infarction.
Case report
We present the case of a 36-year-old caucasian woman with APS diagnosis since
she was 24, with history of arterial hypertension and multiple thrombotic events
(deep vein thrombosis, spontaneous abortions, splenic vein thrombosis). She had
been hospitalized for acute renal failure after her third spontaneous abortion and
was  discharged  under  corticotherapy
(prednisolone
1 mg/Kg/day)  with  pro-
gressive reduction of dose. One month after being hospitalized and one week after
suspending corticotherapy, she was admitted in the emergency department after
4 days of nausea, persistent vomiting and progressive asthenia. Medicated then
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
with warfarin and antihypertensive medication. Initial analytical study revealed
hyponatremia (114 mmol/l), hyperkalemia (7.9 mmol/l) and significative worsen-
ing of renal function (creatinine 4.90 mg/dl). She was readmitted and restarted on
therapy with prednisolone; the basal adrenal function tests under prednisolone
revealed morning serum cortisol 1.3 mg/dl (reference range 5-25) and ACTH
15 pg/ml (9-52). Abdominal CT showed ‘nodular heterogeneous lesion (72!
50 mm) suggestive of adrenal hemorrhage in the right adrenal gland; left gland
poorly visualised’. The patient initiated glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
replacement with very good clinical and analytical response. Further study after
stabilization showed morning cortisol !1 mg/dl (5-25), ACTH 138 pg/ml (9-52);
low levels of aldosterone and adrenal androgens; negative anti 21-hydroxylase
antibodies;  normal  thyroid  function  and  no  anterior  pituitary  deficits.  She
continues to be followed in regular endocrinology consultation.
Conclusion
High index of clinical suspicion for AD in APS is needed - in suspected cases, the
diagnosis should be investigated and treatment promptly initiated. Conversely,
the possibility of APS should be considered in patients with AD of unknown
etiology, after exclusion of more common causes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP279
EP280
Pheochromocytoma - the rare reason of Cushing’s syndrome due to
ectopic corticotropin secretion
Elwira Przybylik-Mazurek1, Ewelina Rzepka1, Anna Kurzynska1,
Alicja Hubalewska-Dydejczyk1, Anna Sowa-Staszczak1,
Andrzej Budzynski2, Magdalena Bialas3 & Robert Chrzan4
1Department of Endocrinology, Medical College Jagiellonian University,
Krakow, Poland;2II Chair of Surgery Medical College Jagiellonian
University, Krakow, Poland;3Chair of Pathomorphology Medical College
Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland;4Chair of Radiology Medical
College Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
Cushing syndrome due to ectopic (adrenocorticotropic hormone) ACTH secretion
(EAS) constitutes approximately 10% of Cushing’s syndrome (CS). In this group
only in about 5% cases pheochromocytoma is the source of ACTH.
We present two patients with EAS by pheochromocytoma.
1. A 70 year-old woman with 3-months history of malaise, weakness, abdominal
pain, loss of weight and appetite, hypertension and diabetes mellitus. One month
earlier she had an episode of acute renal insufficiency after coronarography.
Patient revealed mental confusion, cachexia, swelling of legs, skin with increased
pigmentation, echymoses and petechiae. The laboratory data showed elevated
leukocytosis,  hyperglycemia,  severe  hypokalemia,  and  metabolic  alkalosis,
markedly elevated serum cortisol concentration and ACTH without cortisol
suppression after dexamethasone. Measurements of Metanephrine and Norme-
tanephrine in urine were increased. MRI and somatostatin receptor scintigraphy
(SRS) disclosed 40 mm mass in right adrenal gland. After pharmacological
treatment  patient  was  laparoscopic  operated.  Histological  examinations
confirmed EAS and pheochromocytoma. Unfortunately in the 9-th day after
surgery patient died because of ARDS syndrome.
2.  A
61  year-old  woman  with  2-months  history  of  weight  gain,  proximal
myopathy, depressive disorders, abdominal pain, diabetes mellitus of recent onset
and worseness of hypertension control. Patient had facial and leg edema, plethoric
face, dermal and muscle atrophy and moderate central obesity. The laboratory
data  showed  hyperglycemia,  moderate  hypokalemia,  moderate  leukocytosis,
disturbed circadian cortisol rhythm and increased ACTH level. Measurements of
Metanephrine and Normetanephrine in urine were increased. Abdominal CT scan
and SRS revealed 30 mm mass in right adrenal gland and radiological signs
suggested  pheochromocytoma.  After  pharmacological  treatment  patient  was
successful laparoscopic operated, and all signs of CS regressed. Histological
examinations confirmed EAS and pheochromocytoma.
EAS is difficult to diagnose. Other organs lesions make the prognosis worse.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP280
EP281
Managing a complex case of acromegaly - lessons to learn
Hsiu Lye Yap1,2, Emma Hatfield3, Niamh Martin3, Ravi Assomull2,
Stewart Berry3, Amrish Mehta3, Alison Falconer3, Nigel Mendoza3,
Karim Meeran3 & Sanjeev Mehta2
1St Mary’s Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK;
2Ealing Hospital, London North West Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK;
3Charing Cross Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust,
London, UK.
Our 42-year-old patient presented with breathlessness and signs of congestive
cardiac failure. Her ‘spade-like hands and acromegalic appearance’ were noted on
the post-take round. She had headaches, orthopnoea and secondary amenorrhoea.
She was a poorly controlled diabetic (so OGTT was not performed), anaemic, and
previously had a thyroidectomy.
Pituitary profile showed secondary hypogonadism, normoprolactinaemia and
normal free T4 indicating adequate Thyroxine replacement. A growth hormone
day curve established levels consistently above 70 mg/l with elevated IGF-1 level
of 65.4 nmol/l. Pituitary MRI confirmed a large 2.5 cm pituitary macroadenoma
with carotid sinus invasion and compression of the right optic nerve and chiasm.
Visual fields revealed primary inferior right hemifield and left nasal field loss.
There was significant non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy, with global left
ventricular hypokinesis and ejection fraction of 15% on echocardiogram and
cardiac  MRI.  Monthly  injections  of
120 mg  Lanreotide  were  started,  then
uptitrated to once weekly with addition of 250 mcg Cabergoline weekly. There
was minimal biochemical and radiological response after 5 months, with growth
hormone  levels  staying  above
30 mg/l  and  IGF-1
persistently  raised  at
51.3 nmol/l.
At the pituitary MDT, a 6-month-prognosis was quoted on lone medical therapy.
However,  surgical  debulking  under  general  anaesthetic  was  high  risk  with
estimated mortality of O50% in patients with ejection fraction of !30%, and
unlikely  to  be  curative.  Cardiologists  felt  there  was  no  role  for  cardiac
resynchronisation therapy pre-operatively, as this would not improve her ejection
fraction.  Cardiac  failure  optimisation  and  rapid  uptitration  of  Lanreotide
improved symptoms and allowed her to tolerate radiotherapy, which was the
safest definitive treatment option. If her cardiomyopathy improves, fitness for
surgery will be re-evaluated. Our case highlights challenges in diagnosing and
managing  acromegaly  in  a  patient  with  pre-existing  Type
2 diabetes,  and
cardiomyopathy induced by a large growth hormone secreting pituitary adenoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP281
EP282
Cyclic Cushing’s syndrome - a diagnostic challenge
Daniela Magalha˜es1,2, Rita Bettencourt-Silva1,2, Joana Queirós1,
Paula Freitas1,2, Eduardo Vinha1, Duarte Pignatelli1, Josué Pereira3 &
Davide Carvalho1,2
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism of Centro
Hospitalar de São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Department of Neurosurgery of Centro Hospitalar
de São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome is often challenging considering that none
of the used laboratory tests has an ideal diagnostic accuracy. The complexity of
the diagnosis increases in cyclic disorder, which is characterized by repeated
episodes of cortisol excess followed by periods of normal cortisol secretion.
Case report
A 32-year-old woman with history of arterial hypertension and obesity presented
with  weight  gain,  hirsutism,  abdominal  striae,  uncontrolled  hypertension,
proximal  muscle  weakness  and peripheral  edema. Her  plasma  cortisol  and
ACTH levels were 33.8 mcg/dl (6.2-19.4) and 52.5 ng/l (!63.3), respectively.
24-hour  urinary-free  cortisol  levels were
930 mcg/day (36-137). The 1-mg
overnight dexamethasone suppression test revealed a morning serum cortisol
concentration of 24.3 mcg/dl (!1.8). Pituitary MRI identified a lesion in the
lateral aspect of the left lobe of adenohypophysis with z4 mm. She performed a
48-hours 2 mg/day low-dose dexametasone test 3 months later that showed a final
cortisol level of 1.3 mcg/dl (!1.8). The patient was revaluated 4 months later and
she was clinically better. Six months later she presented with relapsed symptoms.
Several  samples  of  late-night  salivary  revealed  mixed  results:
0.680/0.223/
0.395/1.680 mcg/dl (!0.32). A new pituitary MRI showed a slight increase in the
aforementioned area, now measuringz5.3 mm. The patient performed another
48-hours low-dose dexametasone supression test with a final plasma cortisol level
of 31.3 mcg/dl, and then a high-dose dexametasone supression test with initial
and  final  cortisol  levels  of
29.5
and  16.3 mcg/dl,  respectively,  confirming
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
ACTH-dependency (74.7 pg/ml). The patient underwent transsphenoidal surgery
to remove the pituitary lesion. Anatomopathological analysis revealed pituitary
tissue with no significant changes.
Conclusions
This case report documents a cyclical Cushing’s disease. The duration of the
periods of normal and abnormal cortisol secretion can vary significantly, so the
correct diagnosis can be a challenge in clinical practice.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP282
EP283
Long-term remission (cure?) of acromegaly after discontinuation of
somatostatin analogs
Monica Livia Gheorghiu1,2, Iulia Vargatu1, Anda Dumitrascu1 &
Andra Caragheorgheopol1
1CI Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;
2C. Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
In acromegaly, treatment with somatostatin analogs (SSA) normalizes growth
hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) secretion in about half of
the patients. Usually, the disease relapses biochemically within few months after
treatment withdrawal.
We present two acromegalic patients, women of 49 and 53 years at diagnosis,
respectively, who achieved stable remission of the disease after medical treatment
withdrawal. One had a microadenoma, the other a macroadenoma; no visual field
defect. Both underwent transsphenoidal surgery as first line treatment, and had
hypersecreting remnant tumors, treated with SSA.
In the first case, the first evaluation at 2 months after surgery revealed elevated
GH nadir in OGTT (GHn) of 8.3 ng/ml, with IGF1 of 2.66! upper limit of
normal (ULN). The pituitary remnant was 9/8/12 mm and remained stable until
present. She received medical treatment for 3years, achieving disease control only
on Octreotide LAR 30 mg/28 days associated with CAB 2 mg/week (random GH
0.85 ng/ml,  normal  IGF1).  Currently,
6 months  and  two  evaluations  after
medication withdrawal, she has normal GHn in OGTT (0.5-0.94 ng/ml) and
stable IGF1 of 1.2!ULN.
Two months after pituitary surgery, the second patient had a mildly elevated GHn
in  OGTT  (1.2 ng/ml),  with  IGF1
of
1.36!ULN  and  a  pituitary  mass  of
11.5/7/13.5 mm. For 3 years, she received Octreotide LAR 20 mg/28 days, during
which random GH was 0.28-0.33 ng/ml, with normal IGF1. Now, 1.5 years and
three evaluations after SSA withdrawal, she has normal GH nadir in OGTT (0.7-
0.3 ng/ml), IGF1 of 1.1!ULN and a stable pituitary nodule (4/6 mm). She
received CAB 1 mg/week for 4 months, which did not reduce this IGF1 level.
Conclusion
In a few patients with acromegaly, treatment with somatostatin analogs may
induce a prolonged remission of GH hypersecretion that may persist years after
treatment discontinuation. Long-term monitoring will decide if this is a real cure
of the disease or just a prolonged inhibition of the tumor secretion. Thus,
intermitent discontinuation of the long-term SSA treatment seems justified in
controlled patients with acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP283
EP284
Isolated hypoprolactinaemia: two cases
Zeenat Banu & Ravi Menon
Colchester Hospital University NHS Foundation Trust, Colchester,
Essex, UK.
Case 1: 38 year old was referred for sub-fertility. She had one normal childbirth 5
years ago. There was failure to lactate following the childbirth. There was some
puerperal blood loss, but she resumed normal menstrual periods and had no other
manifestations of hypopituitarism. Pituitary profile showed normal results FSH
2.7 IU/l; LH 1.5 IU/l; 0900 h cortisol 305 nmol/l/l/ TSH 2.85 m/l. Prolactin was
85 m/l. IGF1 18.6 nmol/l. Short synacthen was normal. Previous MRI showed
normal pituitary. She had difficulty conceiving second child. Day 21 progesterone
was O30 suggesting ovulation. Few months after being seen in clinic she
conceived naturally and is currently expecting her second child. There was no
history of recurrent infections.
Case  2:
25  year  old  was  referred  for  labile  mood  and  irregular  periods.
Investigations by her general practitioner had shown low prolactin level on two
occasions. She has two children and had failure of lactation following childbirth.
Her main symptoms were consistent with mild depression. Her periods were
mildly irregular but she had conceived twice naturally. 0900 h pituitary profile
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
was normal with 0900 h cortisol of 550 nmol/l. Prior to being seen in clinic she
had an MRI of pituitary, requested by her GP, which showed no abnormalities.
There was no history of recurrent infections.
Discussion
We present two cases of isolated hypoprolactinaemia with failure of lactation
following childbirth. Both detected incidentally and referred to endocrinology for
evaluation.  Most  cases  of  hypoprolactinaemia  are  secondary  to  pituitary
tumours/surgery or other pituitary disorders. There are only occasional case
reports of isolated hypoprolactinaemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP284
EP285
Polyglandular autoimmune Syndrome type 2/Schmidt’s syndrome
Pratibha Machenahalli & Kevin Shotliff
Chelsea and Westminister Hospital, London, UK.
25-years-old lady presented to gastroenterologist with recurrent bouts of vomiting
associated with abdominal pains, fatigue, muscle aches and dark tan. Initial
biochemical profile and upper GI endoscopy were normal. On examination she
had dark pigmentation of the palms well hydrated and haemodynamically stable.
No family history of autoimmune conditions. She had traumatic laceration of the
liver as a child, otherwise no significant past medical history.
A few days later admitted to A&E with a history of continued vomiting. She was
found to be hypotensive with postural drop and hyponatremic. Random cortisol
was !20, Addison’s disease has been diagnosed. She has been rehydrated and
commenced on IV steroids. Adrenal antibodies were positive. She was started on
oral steroid replacement once haemodynamically stable. She had subclinical
hypothyroidism  with  positive  thyroid  antibodies  now  has  progressed  to
hypothyroidism on levothyroxine replacement. Recently, she has developed
alopecia areata been treated with topical steroid cream by dermatologists.
Discussion
PGA type 2 is common of the immunue-endocrinopathy syndromes affecting two
or more endocrine organs and other non-endocrine organ. It is characterised by
the occurrence of autoimmune Addison’s disease, thyroid autoimmune diseases
and/or type
1 diabetes mellitus. Primary hypogonadism, myasthenia gravis,
coeliac  disease  also  are  commonly  observed  in  this  syndrome.  Rarely  is
associated  with  Alopecia,  pernicious  anaemia,  myasthenia  gravis,  immune
thrombocytopenia purpura, Sjogren’s syndrome, rheumatoid  arthritis.  The
prevalence of Schmidt’s syndrome is 1.4-2.0 per 100 000 populations, most
commonly affects middle aged female.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP285
EP286
Successful management of a case of cerebral salt wanting syndrome
(CSWS) related hyponatremia
Seifeldin Yahia & Jennifer Clayton
Nottingham University Hospital-QMC, Nottingham, UK.
43-year-old lady with a history of rheumatoid arthritis (On Sulfasalazine and
Infliximab IV every 8/52), was brought in to our hospital following a collapse.
She had had acute onset of headache 6 weeks prior to admission with nausea,
vomiting and blurred vision but her symptoms had gradually resolved. Her GCS
on arrival was 5. Subsequent CT scan brain showed acute right-sided subdural
haematoma and subarachnoid haemorrhage and was indicative of coning. She was
taken to theatre immediately for decompressive craniotomy and evacuation of her
acute subdural haematoma. She was transferred to the ITU.
On day 4 post operatively, she was hyponatremic with sodium 127 mmol/l (base
line Sodium was 144 mmol/l pre-operatively). Her sodium continued to fall
progressively,  reaching
118 mmol/l  at  day
6.  Investigations  showed  TSH
1.1 mu/l, urine osmolality 512 mosmol/kg, plasma Osmolality 241 mosmol/kg,
urine sodium 167 mmol/l, urea 2.2 mmol/l, creatinine 39 mmol/l, K 3.5 mmol/l.
She was not dry clinically and her CVP was 5-6 cm H2O. It was difficult to
differentiate between cerebral salt wasting syndrome (CSWS) and SIADH. She
was cautiously treated with hypertonic saline and her hyponatremia corrected
over a couple of days to134 mmol/l.
Discussion
We report a case of hyponatremia secondary to assumed Cerebral salt wanting
syndrome which was successfully and wisely treated with hypertonic saline in the
ITU. The cause of hyponatremia post brain injury is often difficult to ascertain.
We  recommend  patients  should  be  carefully  clinically  and  biochemically
assessed. If this is supportive of cerebral salt wasting syndrome then fluid
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
replacement  should  be  commenced  and  cautious  use  of  hypertonic  saline
considered. Hypertonic saline at a rate between 50 and 150 ml/h as a bolus
initially, and then review as per current standard of care, so as not to increase the
sodium concentration by more than an average of 0.5 mmol/l per h or an increase
no O10 mmol/l in the first 24 h. This is to prevent the development of osmotic
demyelination.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP286
EP287
An adrenal vascular cyst masquerading as malignancy
Shyam Sundar Seshadri, Singhan Krishnan, Anitha Mathews &
John Mathews
Hinchingbrooke Hospital, Huntingdon, UK.
Introduction
Adrenal vascular cysts are rare, in most cases incidentally discovered during
abdominal imaging for other reasons. We present a case of adrenal endovascular
cyst  with  initial  suspicious  features  of  adrenal  malignancy  and subsequent
management and complications.
Case report
This 72-year-old male was initially admitted with a weight loss over 2 months and
new onset fever and rigors and right leg pain. He was noted to have an abdominal
mass. He was treated along the lines of urosepsis and an ultrasound Doppler of his
leg showed femoral and popliteal aneurysms and ultrasound of his abdomen
revealed a large heterogeneous right-sided adrenal mass of 25 cm.
He had a past history of well-controlled hypertension. Hormonal workup revealed
normal adrenal  reserve and normal levels of serum aldosterone, renin and
metanephrines. A CT scan confirmed the adrenal mass with displacement of the
liver and some IVC compression and this had increased in size significantly from
6 cm, 5 years ago. The patient was referred to a tertiary centre for further
management. He presented 2 weeks  later with severe abdominal pain  and
hypotension. A repeat CT scan showed evidence of rupture of the mass with
bleeding into the peritoneum and also haemorrhage into the mass. He was
empirically  treated  with  steroids  and  transferred  to  the  tertiary  centre  for
emergency  surgery  and  mass  removal.  Histology  subsequently  revealed
haemorrhage and necrosis from rupture of a large adrenal pseudo cyst with
negative immunohistochemistry for necrotic tumour cell population but with a
presence of a focal vascular lining suggesting an adrenal endothelial cyst.
Conclusion
Rare adrenal vascular cysts should be considered in the differential of adrenal
masses.  Prompt  surgical  removal  after  appropriate  imaging  and  hormonal
assessments can avoid complications such as rupture and bleeding.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP287
EP288
Another case report of ipilimumab induced hypophysitis
Nawal Ibraheem
Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham, UK.
Introduction
We are presenting a case of presumed ipilimumab induced hypophysitis, after
completion of 4th cycle of Ipilimumab for stage 4 melanoma.
Case Report
A 72-year-old gentleman diagnosed with stage 4 melanoma, Presented with
generalised joint pain and fatigue after 4th cycle of ipilimumab, he had short
synacthen  test,  baseline  serum  cortisol  was
!30 nmol/l,
30 min  cortisol
379 nmol/l, he was started hydrocortisone therapy 10 mg in the morning, 5 mg
at lunch, 5 mg in the evening.
His thyroid function at that time showed TSH !0.1 mU/l, with free T4  of
10.7 pmol/l, and a free T3  of 4.2 pmol/l. He had a normal prolactin, and low
testosterone at 0.6 nmol/l. He underwent MRI of pituitary which showed normal
appearance of pituitary gland, stalks and optic chiasm.
Discussion
Ipilimumab is a human monoclonal antibody that has been shown to overcome the
suppressive effects of cytotoxic T lymphocyte Antigen 4 expression, thereby
enhancing the immune response against tumours. It is used in the treatment of
metastatic melanoma. Side effects include hypophysitis, colitis, uveitis, dermatitis
and arthritis among others.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP288
EP289
Management of the patient with true forms of the precocious pubertal
development: clinical case
Saidganikhoja Ismailov1,2,3, Gulnara Rakhimova1,2,3 &
Diyora Inagamova1,2,3
1Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan;2Center of the
Scientific and Clinical Study of Endocrinology, Ministry of Health of the
Republic of Uzbekistan, Tashkent, Uzbekistan;3Tashkent Medical Institute
of Postgraduate Education, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Background
Appearance of the secondary pubertal signs before the age of 7 years.
Case report
In the Children’s Department of the Republican Specialized Scientific Practical
Medical Center of Endocrinology the patient N., date of birth 2012, under the
examination during the period from 22 January 2014 to 01 February 2014.
Complains at admission were included that increasing size of mammary glands,
menstruation is appearanced, frequent to catch a cold.
From medical history
The girl who is first daughter is family was not born consanguinity. The head
delivery was at term. Examination showed increasing size of the mammary glands
(stage 2 by Tanner), sparse pubic hair.
The  patient  was  being  followed  up  by  a  neuropathologist  because  of  her
convulsive syndrome. The recently treatment was: drug Oxapin 300 mg/1/2 tab
2 times a day and drug Letiram 500 mg/1/2 tab 2 times a day.
The patient’s state at admission was relatively satisfaction. The skins are pale and
moderately moist. Auscultation: in the lung there was vesicular breathing, without
wheezing. The respiration rate was 24 in min. The heart sounds are clear, heart
rate was 130 b/min., AP 90/60 mmHg. Diffusive goiter was on the 1st stage. The
pubertal development; Ma2Ax1P1 Me 1 year, Height - 88 cm (norm 81), weight
- 18 kg 3 S.D.
By Roentgenography of the hand (2014), Bone age was 12-15 years. Growth plate
was open.
Ultrasonography of the small pelvis (2014.08.07), Sizes of the uterine length
together with cervix was 30 mm, thickness was 8 mm, width - 15 mm (norm 36!
14!30 mm). Ovaries: the right ovary located at the12  of fallopian tube. Sizes:
17-16 mm/follicles: 8.7, 15, 12, 5.3 mm. Conclusion: Show PPD.
MRI of the brain and pituitary gland (15.06.2013) - MRI findings of the mass
(hamartoma). There were indirect signs of the intracranial hypertension.
Hormonal analysis: TTG - 1.8 (0.17-4.05 mME/l, T4 - 105 (60-160 ng/dl), GH -
24
(2-20 mME/l), LH-16.1 (0.3-1.0) mIU/ml, FSH - 18.3 (1.0-4.2) IU ml,
Estradiol
- 53.1
(!14.9) pg/ml. An analysis of investigations showed that
significant increase in LH by 16 times, FSH - by 4.4 times, estradiol - by 3.6
times and insignificant level of GH by 1.2 times in comparison with normal
values. The treatment was recommended with Difirilini 3.75.
Conclusions
On  the  basis  of  clinical-laboratory  data  and  MRI  findings,  the  diagnosis
was established: the true precocious pubertal development, hamartoma in the
pituitary body.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP289
EP290
Virilizing adrenocortical tumor: a case report
Silvia Maraver-Selfa, Isabel Cornejo-Pareja, Cristina Díaz-Perdigones,
Isabel Mancha-Doblas & Francisco Tinahones
Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Victoria, Málaga, Spain.
Introduction
Adrenal masses are among the most frequent tumours in humans (ACT). A vast
majority of these tumours are benign (ACAs). Only a small subset of adrenal
masses are malignant adrenocortical carcinomas (ACCs). Tumour size, tumour
weight, hormonal function and pathologic criteria are useful clinicopathological
criteria that can result in accurate diagnosis of most ACCs and ACAs.
Case report
31-years-old woman, without relevant previous history. She had long evolution
hirsutism, acné  and androgenetic alopecia,  with gradual worsening
(SAHA
syndrome). Menarche: 9 years old. She had always had irregular menstruations,
and amenorrhea periods, alternating with polymenorrhea. She was treated with
oral  contraceptives  previously.  Physical  examination:
50 kg,
148 cm,  BMI
22.8 kg/m2, blood pressure 115/85 mmHg, Ferriman scores 25 points. Hormonal
study: TSH 0.57 mUI/ml, free-T4 0.76 ng/dl, FSH 3.85 mUI/ml, LH 4.28 mUI/ml,
prolactin
18.6 ng/ml,  testosterone
2.93 ng/ml
(!1.2),  DHEA-S  1.825 mg/dl
(!560), 17-OH progesterone 5.14 ng/ml, basal cortisol 21.2 mg/dl (!25), ACTH
1 pg/ml, androstendione 12.4 ng/ml (!3.5), overnight dexamethasone suppres-
sion test 9.8 mg/dl, UCL 381 mg/24 h (diuresis 1.700 ml/24 h, Cr.43 mg/dl). MRI:
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
right adrenal mass (6.1!5.6 cm), with inferior vena cava mark, heterogeneous
intensity, isointense in T1 and lightly hyperintense in T2. We decided right
adrenalectomy. Histopathology: 6.8 cm and 120 g homogeneous lesion, smooth
surface,  compatible  with  corticoadrenal  adenoma.  Post-surgery  she  began
hydrocortisone replacement therapy and remained stable. She spontaneously
menstruated and losted 4 kg. Biochemistry: testosterone !0.01 ng/ml, DHEA-
S!15 mg/dl,
17-OH  progesterone
0 ng/ml,  basal  cortisol
4.9 mg/dl,  ACTH
1 pg/ml, androstendione 0.1 ng/ml y UCL 91 mg/24 h. Now treatment is being
reduced gradually, according to clinical evolution.
Conclusion
It is difficult to distinguish between a benign and malign ACT, even with
anatomo-pathology diagnosis. There are no good histologic criteria to distinguish
adenoma from carcinoma. The best way to determine malignancy is the clinical
evolution. In our patient, the fast androgens reduction post-surgery is an indicator
of  surgical  success.  Clinical  evolution  and  biochemistry  determine  initial
pathology report.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP290
EP291
Radiotherapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a rare cause of
hypopituitarism
Filiz Eksi Haydardedeoglu, Gulay Simsek Bagir, Emre Bozkirli,
Okan Bakiner & Melek Eda Ertorer
Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Adana, Turkey.
Introduction
Radiotherapy to the head and neck area is the standard therapy used for the
treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Hypopituitarism is a well-known late
complication of cranial radiotherapy. Although very rarely, it may be observed
following radiotherapy to the head and neck area, as well.
Case report
A 53-year-old  man  was  referred  to  our  endocrinology  department  for
hyponatremia and low free thyroxine (T4) with normal thyroid- stimulating
hormone levels. His medical history was remarkable only for the nasopharyngeal
carcinoma that had been treated with radiation and chemotherapy seven years
before admission. He had been hospitalized many times due to hyponatremia in
other hospitals within the last six months. He had been discharged every time after
the correction of his serum sodium levels.
On  physical  examination,  he  was  pale  and  lethargic.  Blood  pressure  was
85/50 mmHg, heart rate was 74 bpm. His random cortisol level was 3 mg/dl.
Besides cortisol, his testosterone, luteinizing hormone and insulin-like growth
factor-1
levels were also below normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) exhibited normal findings in his pituitary. Based on these results, the
patient was diagnosed to have panhypopituitarism due to the radiotherapy that he
once had for his nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Hormonal substitution therapy with
IV glucocorticoids and levoT4 was started sequentially. His serum sodium level
gradually rose up to normal limits. He no longer required intravenous sodium
replacement.
Conclusion
Hyponatremia is often seen in patients with adrenal insufficiency but the diagnosis
of hypopituitarism in hyponatremic patients is often overlooked and these patients
had  been  admitted  to  the  hospitals  many  times  before  the  underlying
hypopituitarism was diagnosed. Radiotherapy to the head and neck area may
cause hypopituitarism and thus hyponatremia in long term follow-up. Taking
careful medical history plays the pivotal role in making the correct diagnostic
approaches.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP291
EP292
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia and multiple sclerosis: coincidence
or not?
Minodora Betivoiu1, Sorina Martin1,2, Alexandra Nila1, Iuliana Pascu1 &
Simona Fica1,2
1Endocrinology Department, Elias Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;
2Endocrinology Department, Carol Davila University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is an inherited recessive disorder of
adrenal  steroidogenesis,  generally  caused  by  total  or  partial  deficiency  in
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
21-hydroxylase, due to deletions or mutations of CYP21 gene. Some studies
suggest that the association between CAH and multiple sclerosis (MS) could be
nonincidental: a possible MS susceptibility locus is on chromosome 6p21, on
which the CYP21 gene is located.
We report the case of a 16-year-old female who presented to our clinic in
November 2015 with complaints of severe hirsutism exacerbated during puberty,
diplopia, vertigo. In April
2014 the patient was treated for hirsutism with
Spironolactone 75 mg/day but she developed nausea, vomit, ataxia and the
treatment was stopped after 1 month. The patient recovered spontaneously after a
few weeks but diplopia and vertigo appeared one year later. Physical examination
revealed overweight (BMIZ29.4 kg/m2), severe hirsutism (Ferriman Gallwey
scoreZ24), normal pubertal development, regular menses, no genital anomalies.
Laboratory  tests:  EstradioleZ43.66 pg/ml,  FSHZ5.84 mIU/ml,  LHZ
3.08 mIU/ml, cortisol-0800 hZ27.8 mg/dl, ACTHZ56.5 pg/ml, Cortisol-0800 h
after 1 mgDXMovernightZ1.41 mg/dl, DHEASZ438.6 mg/dl (65-368), testos-
teroneZ46.72 ng/dl, 17OH-progesteroneZ2.28 ng/ml, 17OH-progesterone after
ACTH  stimulation  testZ21 ng/ml,  normal  TSH,  ATPO,  FT4,  prolactine.
Abdominal  ultrasound  was  normal.  Ophthalmologic  evaluation:  horizontal
nystagmus, papilledema, sixth nerve paresis. Brain IRM revealed several T2-
hyperintense white matter lesions, located supra-and infratentorial maximum size
2.4 cm. Non-classic CAH and MS were diagnosed and the patient was referred to
the pediatric neurology department. The association between oral contraceptive
(OC) and Spironolactone is probably the best treatment for hirsutism although
there are contradictory data regarding the use of OC in MS patients.
Conclusions
To the best of our knowledge this is the second case of CAH associated with MS
to be reported in the literature. Further extensive epidemiological and genetic
studies could explain the relationships between MS and CAH. Endocrinologists
should  search  for  neurological  signs  and  symptoms  in  CAH  patients  and
neurologists should recognize the presence of CAH in MS patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP292
EP293
Ectopic prolactin-secreting adenoma at the pituitary stalk
Katharina Schilbach & Jochen Schopohl
University Hospital Munich, Munich, Germany.
Almost all cases of  prolactinomas  are benign  intrasellar micro- or  macro-
adenomas. Very rarely benign prolactinomas are located outside the sella and in
most of these cases the tumors are located in the sphenoidal sinus.
We here report a 35 year old woman who presented to the clinic with secondary
amenorrhoea  and  galactorrhoea.  Initial  laboratory  testing  revealed  mild
hyperprolactinemia  between
1100
and
1600 mU/ml  and  hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism  without  further  pituitary  insufficiency.  MRI  showed  normal
intrasellar structures but a mass (5!6!5 mm) at the pituitary stalk just below the
optic chiasm. Further investigations did not show any evidence of underlying
systemic disorder or malignancy.
Stereotactic biopsy was discussed but not performed due to the risk of severe side
effects. Considering the most likely differential diagnosis of an inflammatory
process  such  as  hypophysitis  or  sarcoidosis  the  patient  was  treated  with
glucocorticoids for 5 month which did not have any effect on the stalk mass or
the laboratory findings. Treatment was then switched to Cabergolin and only
8 weeks after initiation of the dopamine-agonistic therapy prolactin-levels were
normalized, the tumor was hardly noticeable and the patient had a regular
menstrual cycle again.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Due to the course of the disease under the different pharmacological approaches
we diagnosed an ectopic microprolactinoma of the pituitary stalk, a rare entity
which has been described twice so far.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP293
EP294
A case of hypothalamic-pituitary sarcoidosis with hypothermia
Raju Panta, Manav Batra, Antoine Makdissi & Ajay Chaudhuri
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.
Introduction
Sarcoidosis is a multisystem noncaseating granulomatous disease with prevalence
of
40/100 000.  One  percent  of  patients  with  sarcoidosis  have  isolated
neurosarcoidosis, few cases involve the hypothalamus/pituitary
(65 reported
cases  from
2002
to
2014).  We  present  a  case  of  hypothalamic-pituitary
sarcoidosis with hypothermia
(one case reported between
2002 and 2014),
leptomeningitis, diabetes insipidus and pan-hypopituitarism.
Case report
Family brought a previously healthy 23-year-old African American male to the
hospital due to fatigue, hypersomnolence for 2 weeks, intermittent headache for
one month. Physical exam revealed non-focal neurological exam, photophobia.
MRI of the brain showed diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement with increased
signal  in  suprasellar,  optic  chiasm,  optic  tracts.  Differential  diagnosis  was
TB/pyogenic meningitis, sarcoidosis and diffuse carcinomatosis. Cerebrospinal
fluid showed protein 418 mg/dl (normal 15-45), WBC 230 cumm (normal 0-5)
(84% lymphocytic), ACE 4 U/l (normal 0-2.5), negative gram stain and culture.
CT chest showed sub centimetre pre-tracheal lymph nodes. Pituitary functions
showed free T4 0.6 ng/ml (normal 0.93-1.7), TSH 1.37 mIU/ml (normal 0.27-4.2),
FSH  0.4 milliUnit/ml
(normal
1-11),  LH
!0.1 milliUnit/ml
(normal
1-8),
ACTH 39.5 pg/ml (normal 7.2-63), Prolactin 14.3 ng/ml (normal 0.5-17), total
testosterone !20 ng/ml (normal 37-198). He tested negative for ANA, HIV,
Hepatitis C, Mycobacterium TB Interferon-Gamma. He later developed diabetes
insipidus and hypothermia (temperature of 338C). He underwent transphenoidal
biopsy of the Dura (frozen section showed no granuloma), biopsy of inferior
portion of pituitary gland (frozen section showed granuloma). He was started on
desmopressin, methylprednisolone, levothyroxine and external warming. Patient
had significant improvement following treatment. Repeat brain MRI showed near
complete  resolution  of  previous  findings.  He  was  discharged  home  on
hydrocortisone, desmopressin and levothyroxine.
Conclusion
Neurosarcoidosis can present with diverse clinical features depending on the
anatomical location of the disease. Common presentations include facial palsy,
leptomeningitis, hypopituitarism. Rarely, it can affect thermo regulation centre of
hypothalamus. It is important to recognize and treat early as it can be life
threatening.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP294
EP295
A patient with radiological dilemma: hemorrhagic pituitary adenoma
or rathke’s cleft cyst?
Sevgul Faki1, Oya Topaloglu1, Cuneyt Bilginer1, Neslihan Cuhaci1,
Karabekir Ercan2, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Radiology,
Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Rathke’s cleft cyst is one of the pituitary non-adenomatous tumors that found in
about 20% of pituitary glands at autopsy. Symptomatic Rathke’s cleft cysts are
rarely, but these cysts can cause serious medical problems associated with
compression of the pituitary gland, pituitary stalk, optic nerve or hypothalamus.
Here, we report a rare case of 73 years old man with sudden onset headache due to
Rathke’s cleft cyst present with symptoms and radiological features like apoplexy
of pituitary adenoma.
Case
A 73-year-old man admitted to our hospital with weight loss and sudden onset
headache. His body mass index were 31.8 kg/m2, blood pressure: 120/84 mmHg
and 68 per min with a regular rhythm. Neurologic examination was normal.
Laboratory  findings  were  as  follows:  CBC  was  normal,  Serum  sodium:
138 mmol/l,  potassium:
4.8 mmol/l,  urea  nitrogen:
35 mg/dl,  creatinine:
1.1 mg/dl, fasting plasma glucose: 102 mg/dl, hemoglobin A1c: 7.3%. Anterior
pituitary function tests were as follows: morning serum cortisol
0.99 mg/dl,
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) 14.2 pg/ml, free T3 1.82 mg/dl, free T4
1.32 mg/dl,  thyroid  stimulating  hormone
(TSH)
2.36 mIU/ml,  luteinizing
hormone (LH) 1.18 mIU/ml, follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 2.47 mIU/ml,
serum  testosterone
!0.0025 ng/dl and serum  prolactin  of
12 ng/ml.  His
laboratory tests revealed panhypopituitarism. Brain magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) showed a 20!15 cm sized sellar cystic lesion, which consisted of a
Rathke’s cleft cyst. On the basis of these results, supplementation with thyroid
hormone and glucocorticoid was started. After 1 month of supplementation
treatment control MRI showed a 8.7!4.3 cm Rathke’s cleft cyst which was
regressed compared to initial imaging.
Conclusion
The neurologic symptoms of endocrinopathies can be associated with Rathke’s
cleft cyst and hemorrhagic pituitary adenoma. The radiological evaluation can be
spurious in these patients. Longer follow-up must be needed in order to confirm
the exact diagnosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP295
EP296
Functional gonadotrophin axis evident as spontaneous puberty in a
pediatric patient with hypopituitarism after caniopharyngioma
resection: a case report
Eleni Rapti, Maria Grammatiki, Athanasios Mousiolis,
Xanthippi Tsekmekidou, Maria Resta, Spyridon Karras, Maria Yavropoulou
& Kaliopi Kotsa
1st Internal Medicine Clinic, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, University General Hospital of Thessaloniki; AHEPA,
Thessaloniki, Greece.
Objective
To  report  a  case  of  hypogonadism  reversal  and  spontaneous puberty  in  a
craniopharyngioma patient who suffered from hypopituitarism as a result of
complete surgical resection.
Methods
A 13-year-old  boy  with  hypopituitarism  was  evaluated  for  right  testicular
sensitivity.
At the age of 6 the child presented with growth arrest and a craniopharyngioma
causing pituitary insufficiency was diagnosed. Treatment with hydrocortisnone
and  thyroxine  supplementation  was  initiated  and  he  was  subjected  to  a
transphenoidal surgery that resulted in complete tumor resection (adamanti-
noma). Postsurgical biochemical testing confirmed panhypopituitarism and he
was  prescribed  levothyroxine,  hydrocortisone  and  desmopressin  supple-
mentation. Recombinant growth hormone was initiated 2 years later since growth
had not resumed. Gonadotropins had been undetectable since diagnosis and the
last evaluation had confirmed prepubertal status.
On clinical examination increased testicular volume was found (10-12 ml) with
absence of pubic hair and mild sensitivity was confirmed. The Scrotum ultrasound
revealed normal appearing testes with a maximal diameter of 4.5 cm left and
4.1 cm right. Testosterone and adrenal androgen levels were below normal limits
but a GnRH stimulation test (2.5 m/kg) provoked a four fold increase of LH. Onset
of puberty was suspected.
Results
Six months later, measurement of basal gonadotropins (FSHZ1.4 U/L, LHZ
1.8 U/L), testosterone (98 ng/dl NL 10-572) and inhibin B (216 pg/ml NL 68-
300) indicated the onset of puberty that was confirmed by a tenfold increase of LH
in the GnRH stimulation test.
Conclusions
Recovery  of  pituitary  function  in  craniopharyngioma  patients  who  had
panhypopituitarism  both  prior  and  after  complete  surgical  resection  of  the
tumor has only rarely been reported. Nevertheless, this case depicts that one
should consider the possibility of a functional gonadal axis prior to steroid
supplementation for puberty induction to children suffering from hypopituitarism
due to craniopharyngioma diagnosed and treated before the onset of puberty.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP296
EP297
Endocrine manifestations in a case of adult-onset Langerhans cell
histiocytosis with multisystem involvement
Lourdes Garcia-Garcia-Doncel, Rosa Marquez-Pardo, Gloria Baena-Nieto,
Manuel Cayón-Blanco, Rosario López-Velasco & Isabel Torres-Barea
Jerez Hospital, Jerez/Cádiz, Spain.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare disorder with variable clinical
presentations. Among the endocrine compromise, the LCH has a predilection for
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. However, primary thyroid involvement is rare
and usually related to multisystemic disease.
Case Report
We present a 30-year-old woman who requested a medical consultation because of
polyuria and was found to have central diabetes insipidus (CDI). The patient was
diagnosed 6 months later with hypopituitarism. Pituitary stalk thickening was
detected on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Hepatomegaly was also found.
Liver biopsy revealed nonalcoholic steatohepatitis with cirrhotic evolution. Three
years later she was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and morbid obesity. Shortly after
she was referred to the hospital because of lost of recent memory and dyspnea.
Laboratory tests were within the normal range. Magnetic resonance imaging
revealed a 15!13!22 mm mass involving pituitary stalk and hypothalamic region.
On computed tomography scan a diffuse goiter, a thymic tumor and diffuse
interstitial lung disease were observed. Transbronchial biopsy was diagnosed of
LCH. Positron emission tomography imaging revealed a hypermetabolic pituitary
lesion and moderate tracer uptake in the thymo, thyroid and lungs. The patient was
given chemotherapy with cladribine and prednisone with excelent tolerance.
Conclusions
In patients with CDI and pituitary stalk thickening, LCH should be considered in the
differential  diagnosis.  Close  surveillance  for  this  patient  population  may  be
warranted to detect other pituitary hormone deficiencies and even a multisystem
disease involving other endocrine glands, such as the thyroid.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP297
EP298
Cases of Cushing syndrome manifesting after delivery
Nam Kyeong Kim1, Mi-Kyung Kim1, Sunghwan Suh2, Nan Hee Cho1 &
Hye Soon Kim1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Keimyung University Dongsan Medical
Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea;2Department of Internal Medicine,
University College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.
Background
Pregnancy with Cushing syndrome (CS) is rare because infertility is associated with
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism by cortisol and androgens excess. Here we
reported the cases of CS that presented signs and symptoms of CS after delivery.
Case reports
The first case is a 30-year-old woman who presented 8 months after second baby
delivery amenorrhea even though she stopped breastfeeding. For 3 months before her
visit, she gained weight and had easy bruisability. She had a history of gestational
diabetes. On physical examination, she had moon face, buffalo hump and abdominal
striae  with  purple  colored  pigmentation.  Urine  hCG  was  negative.  Plasma
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was high and low dose dexamethasone test
was not suppressed. The brain magnetic resonance image showed a 6 mm sized
adenoma in the left side of pituitary gland. A transsphenoidal adenomectomy was
performed. Shortly after operation, she had adrenal insufficiency. However, 5 months
later, clinical symptoms improved and her pituitary-adrenal function was normalized.
The second case is a 33-year-old woman who presented 5 months after delivery 14 kg
weight gain. She was diagnosed with hypertension 3 years ago. On physical
examination, she had moon face, acne, hirsutism, central obesity and abdominal
striae; 75 g oral glucose tolerance test showed diabetes. Plasma ACTH was normal
and low dose dexamethasone test. Other hormone related adrenal gland was normal.
The abdominal computed tomography showed 35 mm sized enhancing mass in the
right adrenal gland. Laparascopic adrenalectomy was performed and she took
hydrocortisone for adrenal insufficiency, anti-hypertensive drug for hypertension and
metformin for diabetes. One year after operation, clinical symptoms and metabolic
parameters were normalized and she stopped all medications.
Conclusion
CS with pregnancy is rare. We reported cases that manifested CS after delivery and
resolved after operation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP298
EP299
Initial presentation with diabetes insipidus in langerhans cell
histiocytosis, can be marker of multisystemic and progressive
involvement
Nizameddin Koca1, Gamze Emlek1, Pinar Sisman2, Tuba Gullu Koca3,
4
Ozlem Sengoren Dikis5, Ozen Oz Gul2 & Soner Cander
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
1
Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Internal Medicine,
Bursa, Turkey;2Uludag University Medical School, Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;3Bursa AOS Oncology Hospital, Internal
Medicine, Bursa, Turkey;4Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research
Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;5Bursa Yuksek
Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Pulmonology, Bursa, Turkey.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare histiocytic disorder most commonly
characterized  by  osteolytic  bone  lesions.  Central  nervous  system
(CNS)
involvement observed at 6% and Diabetes insipidus (DI) one of the important
signs of CNS involvement.
A 40-years-old woman presented with polyuria, polydipsia and headache. Water
deprivation test was compatible with DI. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
shows  4!4 mm  focal  thickening  at  the  distal  infundibular  stalk.  She  was
followed-up under desmopressin. At the sixth months of therapy, clinical situation
negatively  progressed  with  complaints  of  lethargy,  diplopia,  menstrual
irregularity, headache and forgetfulness. MRI revealed progression of nodular
thickness (18!15 mm) through hypothalamus. Secondary hypogonadism was
detected while other pituitary functions were normal. Multiple, irregularly shaped
cystic lesions at he posterior and upper lobes of lungs and multiple lymph nodes
with max 20 mm diameter was observed in computed tomography. There were no
bone lesion in direct radiographies and there was no skin involvement. Open
thoracoscopic biopsy performed by surgeon and revealed LCH on histopatho-
logical  examination  with  positive  CD68,  S100
and  CD1a  staining.  After
diagnosis, PET-scan performed and reveals increased osteoblastic activity at
the 6th, 8th and 9th right ribs and in the central part of the left femoral shaft. Bone
marrow biopsy was reported as normocellular. External radiotherapy and six
cycle of chemotherapy (vinblastineCprednisolon) was planned. Also she was on
desmopressin, prednisolone and levothyroxine treatment.
We reported this case to refer to diabetes insipidus as a rare presentation of
Langerhans cell histiocytosis which a rare and some times multysystemic progressive
disease. Diabetes insipidus, is an important indicator for stalk lesions and may be
marker of very rare conditions such as atypical tumor of the sellar region, sarcoidosis,
lymphocytic hypophysitis or histiocytosis like in this case. It should be monitored
dynamically because of the possibility of progressive nature of the disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP299
EP300
Temozolomide treatment in pituitary tumor causing Cushing’s Disease
resistant to conventional therapy - case report
Aleksandra Gilis-Januszewska1,2, Jacek Pantoflinski2, Renata Turek-
Jabrocka1,2, Grzegorz Sokolowski2, Malgorzata Wilusz2, Dorota Pach1,2 &
Alicja Hubalewska-Dydejczyk1,2
1Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow,
Poland;2Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital, Krakow,
Poland.
Objective
The management of pituitary tumors causing Cushing’s Disease are a multi-
disciplinary challenge to clinicians with neurosurgery as a first line treatment
followed by the radiotherapy and pharmacotherapy including chemiotherapy.
Such tumors are difficult to treat with high rate of recurrence. To date only 25
patients  with  Cushing  Disease  treated  with  the  new  alkylating  agent
temozolamide (TMZ) have been reported.
Materials and methods
Sixty-one year old male patient was diagnosed as Cushing’s Disease in the course
of pituitary macradenoma in 2011. Patient underwent four transphenoidal non
radical  neurosurgeries
(2012,
2013)  with  rapid  tumor  progression,  with
postsurgical insufficiency of gonadal and thyroid axis, repeated non radical
bilateral adrenalectomy (2012, 2013) and stereotactic radiotherapy and gamma
knife surgery (2013, 2015). Histopatological examination revealed macroade-
noma with high cell polimorfism and presence of the Crooke’s cells. Patient has
been treated with 600 mg of ketokonazol. From 2015 treated with six cycles of
temozolamide with important clinical improvement with the 23-25% decrease of
morning  and  midnight  cortisol  and  the  decrease  of  ACTH  from
1317  to
689 pg/ml. In the control MRI the size of the tumor was the same as in the
previous examination MRI-(30!35!35 mm). There were not side effects of
TMZ. After oncological consultation the decision to continue TMZ treatment was
undertaken. After the 9th cycle of TMZ in XII 2015 in the PET examination there
was an increase in the size of the tumor to 35!53!54 mm. ACTH increased to
779 pg/ml, with morning and midnight cortisol increase. The clinical status and
sight deterioration and hearing loss were observed.
Conclusions
The treatment with TMZ was effective and safe during first six cycles with
progression observed during the continuation of the treatment. Further studies on
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
the effectiveness of TMZ and other agents should be continued in patients with
corticotrophin tumors resistant to conventional therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP300
EP301
Acromegaly in a male patient with Kleinfelter syndrome
Sefika Burcak Polat1, Nagihan Bestepe1, Oya Topaloglu1, Ercan Bal2,
Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara, Turkey;
2Department of Neurosurgery, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,
Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Klinefelter syndrome is known as the set of symptoms that result from two or
more X chromosomes in males. There is no known association of this syndrome
with GH hypersecretion. The most remarkable symptom is gigantism and it can
also be observed in androgen deficient states as such as the Klinefelter syndrome
and some more genetic syndromes such as the Sotos syndrome, the Marfan
syndrome, the homocystinuria, and the fragile X-syndrome. Herein we presented
a case with both Kleinfelter and acromegaly.
Case
A 40-year-old male with previously known hypergonadotropic hypogonadism due to
Kleinfelter syndrome (47, XXY) was referred to our clinics with the symptoms of
increased  ring  size,  arthralgia,  excessive  sweating  and  headache.  Physical
examination revealed multiple skin tags, mild coarsening of the facial features,
soft fleshy hands and interdental separation. He was 186 cm in height and 82 kg in
weight. In the hormone panel, basal gonadotropins were elevated with low plasma
testosterone, spot growth hormone (GH) was 4.22 mg/l serum and insulin like growth
factor-1 (IGF1) level was 611 mg/l which was above the age matched reference range
(105-280 mg/l). We performed OGTT with 75 mg oral glucose and the nadir GH was
1.0 mg/l. MRI scan of the pituitary revealed an adenoma 12 mm in size. Adenoma
was resected with endoscopy guided transsphenoidal approach and the histopathol-
ogy was consistent with adenoma stained positive with GH. His IGF-1 was
normalized and spot GH was !1 mg/l 3 months after the operation.
Conclusion
Acromegaloidism was reported in Kleinfelter syndrome which was recognized as a
condition which resembles acromegaly by its clinical manifestations without excess
secretion of GH and somatomedins. Ours was the first Kleinfelter case in the
literature diagnosed with acromegaly that means clinical tests are indicated in the
presence of suspicious findings.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP301
EP302
Hypophysitis as a complication of ipilimumab treatment
Ioannis Svilias & Jan Cap
Charles University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, Hradec Kralove,
Czech Republic.
Introduction
In the last few years new imunomodulatory drugs are used for the treatment of
metastatic melanoma. One of these drugs is ipilimumab, a monoclonal antibody
that activates the immune system by targeting CTLA-4 protein receptor. This
monoclonal  antibody  is  very  effective  but  there  is  a  higher  risk  of
endocrinopathies like an adverse effect of treatment, mostly hypophysitis and
hypothyroidism.
Case
We present a 68-year-old patient with metastatic melanoma after four cycles of
ipilimumab treatment. She was admitted for malaise, headache, nausea and vomiting.
In the laboratory results hypocorticalism was diagnosed (cortisol lower than 28 nmol/l)
with normal ACTH (12.7 ng/l). Administration of corticosteroids was started with an
immediate effect and after 3 days MR of hypophysis was performed with a normal
result. Nine months after hypophysitis the patient is still on corticosteroids.
Conclusion
Ipilimumab is a very effective CTLA-4 inhibitor that prolongs survival in patients
with metatstatic melanoma. In the literature cases of hypophysitis were described as
an adverse effect of treatment. That is why during therapy they are necessary regular
controls of pituitary hormones. In case of hypophysitis high-dose corticosteroids
should be given.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP302
EP303
Diabetes insipidus due to hypophysitis
Agatha Vasileiou, Dimitra Pappa, George Filippakopoulos, John Gkountios
& Alexandra Bargiota
University Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece.
Introduction
Hypophysitis is a rare entity, more common in women in pregnancy and the
postpartum  period  and  can  cause  various  symptoms  such  as  headache,
hypopituitarism and visual disturbances. Stalk thickening and homogeneous
enhancement of the gland are the characteristic magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) findings. The diagnosis is based on the clinical picture and on follow up
MRIs. Usually involves the anterior pituitary alone, whereas isolated-posterior-
pituitary-involvement is quite rare.
We present here two cases of diabetes insipidus (DI) due to hypophysitis.
Case reports
A 35-year-old woman presented with a 2-month history of headache and the last
fortnight she developed polydipsia, polyuria and nocturia. Her past medical
history,  except  autoimmune  thyroiditis,  was  unremarkable.  Clinical  and
biochemical findings were in accordance with DI. The anterior pituitary function
was intact. Pituitary MRI showed enlargement of posterior lobe, stalk thickening
and homogeneous enhancement of pituitary’s signal after gadolinium adminis-
tration. She was treated with prednisolone 40 mg tapered over 3 months. The
symptoms gradually subsided, with a significant improvement of her imaging
findings at 3 months.
A 46-year-old woman, with history  of hyperlipidemia, developed  suddenly
symptoms of extreme polyuria and polydipsia and presented with hypernatremia.
On the basis of the clinical and biochemical findings the diagnosis of DI was
made. Further evaluation revealed no anterior pituitary dysfunction. MRI of the
sella showed pituitary stalk thickening and the diagnosis of possible hypophysitis
was made. Due to the severity and the persistence of her symptoms, she was also
treated with 40 mg of prednisolone tapered gradually. Her symptoms gradually
improved and diabetes insipidus completely disappeared at 3 months. MRI of the
pituitary at 3 months showed a normal pituitary stalk.
Conclusion
Hypophysitis can have a variable clinical and imaging presentation. As in our
cases, DI, although rare, can be one of the clinical presentations. Corticosteroid
treatment can improve the clinical course and the imaging findings.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP303
EP304
Association of two aggressive tumors (prolactinoma and multiple
meningioma) - difficult issue, difficult management
Georgiana Constantinescu1,3, Alina Belceanu1,3, Danisia Haba1,4,
Aurora Constantinescu1,2, Daniel Rotariu1,4, Anamaria Bursuc1,3,
Ioana Armasu1,3, Cristina Preda1,3 & Carmen Vulpoi1,3
1Gr. T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania;2Clinical
Rehabilitation Hospital, Iasi, Romania;3Saint Spiridon Clinical Emergency
Hospital, Iasi, Romania;4Prof. Dr. N. Oblu Clinical Emergency Hospital,
Iasi, Romania.
Introduction
The coexistence of pituitary adenoma and meningiomas is very rare. It is
debatable if meningiomas result as a consequence of hormone dependent growth
or secondary to radiation.
We report a rare case of coexisting brain tumors: a prolactin secreting pituitary
adenoma and two meningiomas in a 54-year-old female patient.
Case report
Onset at 46 years with bitemporal hemianopsia, without other clinical complaints.
MRI  confirmed  a  pituitary  macroadenoma
(22/19/35 mm)  with  suprasellar
evolution.
Hormonal balance revealed secondary thyroid and gonadal insufficiency with
hyperprolactinemia  for  which  Cabergoline  was  started  with  initial  good
evolution. Three years later, acute intracranial hypertension was solved by
partial  transcranial  adenomectomy.  Gamma  knife  radiation  completed  the
treatment, with subsequent secondary adrenal and thyroid insufficiency. Same
year, the patient underwent a subtotal thyroidectomy for nodular goiter. After
4 years of treatment with variable doses of cabergoline, the progressive tumor
growth imposed a new intervention - transsphenoidal adenomectomy, with
initially good evolution. One year later (01.2016), intensive vertiginous syndrome
imposed reinvestigations and cerebral MRI identified two cerebral meningiomas,
one of them located at the cranio-spinal junction, which needed urgent excision.
Postoperatory, the patient complains of gait dysfunction, nausea, and headache.
Clinically, left cranial nerves paresis X, XI, and Xll was objectified. Remnant
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
pituitary adenoma of 19/21/18 mm located in left cavernous sinus was seen on
MRI. Hormonal investigations confirmed pituitary insufficiency (thyroid, adrenal
and gonadotrope axes), with normal prolactin levels. Currently, she is on thyroid
and corticoid substitution, without dopamine agonists, with specific neurologic
symptomatic treatment.
Conclusions
Recent studies have revealed the existence of prolactin receptors in meningioma,
thus explaining the proliferative effect. In our case we may explain the growth of
meningiomas not only secondary to the invasive prolactinoma, but as well as
radiation induced.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP304
EP305
Malignant pheocromocytoma - a challenging diagnosis
Liliana Topor1 & Anca Sirbu1,2
1Elias University Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;2Carol Davila University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Malignant pheocromocytoma is a rare and problematic disease because it is
diagnosed only in the presence of metastases, with no definitive histological or
cytological criteria of malignancy. It typically metastasizes to bone, liver, lung
and lymph nodes.
A 38-year-old  woman  presented  for  hypertension
(max  sBPZ160 mmHg),
palpitation and dyspnea, with family antecedents of mammary cancer. Clinical
examination was normal with the exception of palpable adenophaties at the
submandibular level, bilateral laterocervical and in the left axilla, with maximum
diameter of 1 cm, mobile on all plans; blood pressure equal at both armsZ
110/60 mmHg without orthostasis. Biological tests were normal; at hormonal
profile the only modifications were metanephrine raised 5.4-fold (486.8 pg/ml)
and  normetanephrine  raised
1.35-fold
(244.6 pg/ml),  the  other  hormonal
measurements being in normal limits: TSH, iPTH, ACTH and cortisol with
normal nycthemeral rhythm, prolactin, gonadotropins, estradiol, testosterone.
Imaging exams revealed: ultrasonography - normal thyroid gland, laterocervical
and submandibular adenophaties and a node in left breast; abdominal contrast CT:
an iodophil formation of 29/26 mm, with central necrosis in the left adrenal and
multiple formations in the liver space; chest radiography: pulmonary micronodes
in  the  apical  area.  It  was  preceded  unilateral  adrenalectomy  and  the
histopathological results are expected.
This is a case of young woman with catecholamine hypersecretion and a mass in
the left adrenal- most probably pheocromocytoma, which associated lymphade-
nopathies,  liver  formations  and  pulmonary  micronodules-  places  where
pheocromocytoma usually metastasize, so most probably a malignant pheocro-
mocytoma with the doubt of coexistence of another tumor. Although the clinical
presentation and the laboratory findings were not that impressive; the malignancy
in case of pheocromocytoma cannot be excluded regarding its definition, so other
noninvasive and sensitive criteria of diagnosis would be necessary.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP305
EP306
Visual impairment revealing a growth hormone-producing pituitary
adenoma in an 14-year-old boy: a case report
Ines Barka, Emna Dendena, Yosra Hasni, Amel Maaroufi, Maha Kacem,
Molka Chadli & Koussay Ach
Endocrinology Department, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse,
Tunisia.
Background
Gigantism  indicates  excessive  secretion  of  growth  hormone
(GH)  during
childhood Pituitary gigantism is very rare and the description of the disease is
limited to small series and case reports. Here, we report a case of pituitary
gigantism in a child revealed with visual defect.
Case report
A 14-year-old boy presented with headache and left visual loss. On examination,
he had visual acuity in his right eye of 2/10. His height was 178.0 cm (3 cm above
standard deviation) and body weight was 65 kg (C2.5 S.D.). He showed enlarged
hands  and  feet,  and  prognathic  mandibles.  His  bone  age  was  normal  for
chronological  age.  Laboratory  investigation  showed  the  following  results:
random serum GH of 46.9 ng/ml (0-10 ng/ml); insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1)Z1370 ng/ml
(220-616 ng/ml);  IGF-BP-3Z6000 ng/ml
(2.200-5.900
ng/ml); and prolactinZ12 ng/ml (3-25 ng/ml), free T4Z5.5 (7-19 pmol/l) and
cortisolZ110 ng/ml (70-200 ng/ml).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a 50-mm-sized pituitary
adenoma. The patient was put on hormonal replacement and transsphenoidal
surgery was performed. Pituitary MRI scan was performed 6months after surgery
and showed residual tumor. Medical treatment with a somatostatin analogue for
six months was successful. GH level was 0.6 ng/ml and IGF1 was 205 ng/ml.
Discussion
We report a case of childhood gigantism caused by GH secreting pituitary
adenomas which seems to be more invasive and aggressive in children than in
adults. Treatment of pituitary gigantism in childhood is difficult and often
unsatisfactory. Our patient should be closely followed up for the potential risk of
developping of other hormonal deficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP306
EP307
A rare complication of macroprolactinoma treatment with cabergoline:
herniation of optic chiasma
Seyid Ahmet Ay1,2, Kamil Baskoy1,2, Veysel Ozalper1,2, Ferhat Deniz1,2 &
Arif Yonem1,2
1Endocrinology and Metabolism, Haydarpasa Training Hospital, Gulhane
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Internal Medicine, Haydarpasa
Training Hospital, Gulhane School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Prolactinoma is the most common form of all pituitary tumors, and currently,
treatment with cabergoline constitutes first choice therapy for prolactinoma.
Surgical  approach  is  recommended  when  medical  therapy  fails  or  visual
disturbance  due  to  pituitary  mass  develops.  Here  we  present  a  case  of
macroprolactinoma who developed empty sella and optic chiasm protrusion
secondary to cabergoline treatment.
Case
A 20-year-old male patient referred to our clinic, complaining of impotence and
infertility. On laboratory investigation, he had an increased level of serum
prolactin (1600) and low testosterone (100). His testicular ultrasonography was
normal. MRI examination showed a pituitary mass, measuring 25!18!22 mm.
The mass replaced the sella and caused optic chiasm depression but caused no
visual impairment clinically. The patient was diagnosed with macroprolactinoma
and started cabergoline in a dose of 1 mg/weekly. During the 3rd month of
therapy, prolactin level was decreased (48 IU/ml), there was no sign or symptom
attributable to pituitary apoplexy. After 4 months of therapy with cabergolin,
there was no visible mass in the pituitary and serum prolactin level was in normal
range. Thereafter, cabergoline dose was decreased (0.5 mg/weekly) and he was
advised to come for control after 3 months. However, the patient came later than
said. His control MRI showed he had still no pituitary mass, but had empty sella
and protrusion of optic chiasm into the sellar area. Luckily, he had no clinical sign
of visual disturbance. We thought that the protrusion of optic chiasm may be
secondary  to  cabergoline  treatment  since  we  had  no  other  explanatory
mechanism. During the following controls, there was no change in terms of
clinical and laboratory findings, but pituitary gland height was highly decreased
(1 mm).
Discussion
Cabergoline, used as a first-line agent for prolactinoma treatment, not only
reduces the synthesis and release but also has cytolytic effects, thereby reducing
tumoral mass. Consequently, macroprolactinoma patients treated with cabergo-
line should be followed-up more attentively and physicians should be alert in
terms of therapy-related effects or complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP307
EP308
A rare case of panhypopituitarism: pituitary stalk interruption
syndrome
Kamil Baskoy1, Seyid Ahmet Ay1, Barbaros Basbug2, Ferhat Deniz1 &
Arif Yonem1
1Endocrinology and Metabolism, Haydarpasa Training Hospital, Gulhane
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Internal Medicine, Haydarpasa
Training Hospital, Gulhane School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Hypopituitarism is characterized by decreasing of pituitary hormones, which can
result from diseases of the pituitary gland or the hypothalamus. The prevalence of
hypopituitarism  is
30-45
out  of
100 000
in the  world wide.  Causes of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
panhypopituitarism are non-tumoral hypotalomopituitary reasons (50%), pitu-
itary tumors (43%) and extra-pituitary tumors (7%). Here we want to present a
very rare case of pan hypopituitarism; pituitary stalk interruption syndrome
(PSIS).
Case report
A 22-year-old male patient applied to our policlinic for routine control while
continuing  His  medical  treatments  for  panhypopituitarism.  His  ongoing
replacement therapy included hydrocortisone, levothyroxine and testosterone
hormones for 10 years. His height was 1.85 cm, weight 75 kg, and had a pale
appearance on the face. Laboratory examination results at our outpatient clinic
were  compatible  with  panhypopituitarism.  MR  imaging  was  done  for
panhypopituitarism etiology. Adenohypophysis and infundibulum were absenton
MR screening. Neurohypophysis was located at infundibular recess neighborhood
in front of third ventricle. As confirmed at MRI, the reason of panhypopituitarism
was PSIS. We were not able to do molecular research due to our laboratory
insufficiency. His drug regime was reviewed and advised to come regular follows.
Conclusion
Congenital panhypopituitarism is often related with a small pituitary, thinned or
interrupted stalk, and ectopic neurohypophysis, all together referred the PSIS.
Especially due to improvements in screening, the number of PSIS diagnosis has
increased. Perinatal events and genetic mutations are accused by at PSIS etiology
but exact reason has not illuminated yet. Usually posterior hypophysis functions
are protected at PSIS, but, different degree impairment are seen in anterior
hypophysis functions. In this case, especially all anterior hypophysis hormones
were deteriorated thought neuroyhypophysis hormones were normal. Patient was
clinically benefited from hormone replacement treatments.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP308
EP309
Psychiatric troubles revealing isolated primary hypoaldostronism
Boudiaf Dia Eddine, Azzoug Said & Chentli Farida
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Bab El Oued
Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Introduction
Hyponatremia’s etiological diagnosis remains a challenge in the real life. Our aim
was to report a patient who was sent for severe behavioral disorders revealing
hyponatremia  due  to  an  isolated  deficit  in  aldosterone.  This  observation
emphasizes the extreme rarity of the disease which deserves to be reported.
Case report
A young patient aged 34 with a history of autoimmune thyroiditis consulted for an
acute and severe psychiatric syndrome with normal cerebral MRI. His clinical
examination was normal except for some signs of dehydratation. Biological
assessment  revealed  a  profound  hyponatremia
(!120 mmol/l,  nZ135-145)
which did not respond to conventional treatment.
Blood glucose and kidney function were normal. Glucocorticoids deficiency was
excluded as several plasma cortisol were normal (O500 nmol/l). Faced to this
enigma, isolated aldosterone deficiency was suspected and confirmed. Actually,
aldosterone in standing position was low (39-56 pmol/l, nZ208-1000) and
plasma renin was increased: 2139 mIU/l (n: 4.4-46.1). He was treated with
fludrocortisone and the follow up showed sodium normalization, spectacular
improvement of the general condition, and disappearance of psychiatric troubles.
Discussion
Typically hypo aldosteronism is suspected if there is a persistent hyperkalemia,
but  sometimes  it  can  be  revealed  by  psychiatric  troubles  due  to  severe
hyponatremia causing infra-radiological cerebral edema as in the illustrated
case in who all symptoms resolved after Fludrocortisone. On the etiological side,
we have ruled out the obvious causes such as heparin intake, severe diseases, and
adrenal metastases. Were also discussed late onset genetic enzyme deficits, but
autoimmune etiology was the most probable because of the patient background
and positivity to anti 21OHase anti bodies: 2.2 U/ml (n!1).
Conclusion
The  isolated primary  aldosteronism  remains  an underestimated  cause  of
hyponatremia; it should be included in the etiological diagnosis of resistant
cases to conventional therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP309
EP310
Testicular adrenal rest tumors - a case report
Nur Kebapci1, Cavit Can2, Mustafa Acikalin3 & Mahmut Kebapci4
1Department of Endocrinology, Eskisehir Osmangazi University School of
Medicine, Eskisehir, Turkey;2Department of Urology, Eskisehir Osmangazi
University School of Medicine, Eskisehir, Turkey;3Department of
Pathology, Eskisehir Osmangazi University School of Medicine, Eskisehir,
Turkey;4Department of Radiology, Eskisehir Osmangazi University School
of Medicine, Eskisehir, Turkey.
The patient had been diagnosed with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) at age
5 because of precocious of puberty. He had been receiving dexamethazone and
fludrocortisone therapy over the course of his life. When he was 16 years old, a
scrotal ultrasound had been performed for the evaluation of bilateral testicular
pain which revealed multiple sharply marginated, hypoechoic masses throughout
both testes. A biopsy of left testis had been reported as ‘Leidig cell tumour’. He
refused orchiectomy and exited the follow-up of the prior clinic. After 4 years, he
was admitted to our endocrinology clinic at the age of 20. A review of his story
and laboratory findings showed that he had 21 hydroxilase deficiency, bilateral
tumor of the testes. His compliance to glucocorticoid treatment was poor. The first
biopsy of testis and a new biopsy of left testis was evaluated by the same
pathologist and reported as a proliferation of polygonal cells with abundant
granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm. Reinke crystals were absent, Kİ67%1-2, CD56
(C). Immunohistochemically, synaptophysin was positive, inhibin-alpha was
focally positive.
Testicular lesions in the setting of CAH are commonly referred to as testicular
adrenal rest tumors. They may arise from aberrant adrenal cells that descend with
the testes during embryogenesis. They are frequently benign, multiple  and
bilateral. The tumors are most prevalent in younger adult males with a peak
incidence between 20 and 40 years of age. First line imaging modality in the
detection and surveillance of these tumors is ultrasonography. Histologically,
testicular tumors of the adrenogenital syndrome are commonly mistaken for
Leydig cell tumors as in our case. Clinical follow-up without orchiectomies is
recommended unless untreated nodules of adrenal rests expand and destroy the
testicular parenchyma, resulting in low testosterone production and infertility.
Patient compliance to treatment is important since their presence is suggestive of
suboptimal hormone replacement therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP310
EP311
Gynaecomastia secondary to human chorionic gonadotrophin secreting
lung tumour
Muhammad M Alam1, Neil Gittoes1 & AW Safi2
1University Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, UK;2University Hospital
Coventry, Coventry, UK.
Objective
To describe a 32-year-old patient presenting to endocrine clinic as painful
gynecomastia.
Method
We present clinical and radiological course of a rare case of gynecomastia
secondary to HCG producing lung tumour.
Result
A 32-year-old patient presented to endocrine clinic with symptoms of painful
lumpiness of nipples for the last 6 months. There is no history of any milk or blood
discharge from the nipples and he has not noticed any other lumps in his body. He
is not taking any regular medications. He does regular exercise and denied any
steroid intake. There is no history of any weight loss. There are no testicular
lumps. There is a history of increase hair growth and acne of his chest and back.
On examination, no palpable mass felt in his testes and he was having bilateral
gynecomastia.
His hormonal profile showed markedly raised testosterone, oestradiol, high
17-hydroxyprogesterone and beta HCG. His LH and FSH was suppressed.
CXR showed right ung mass and CT thorax showed right lung tumor possible
carcinoid awaiting biopsy under respiratory physicians.
Conclusion
Although gynecomastia is a common disorder, hormonal work-up including hCG
beta subunit should be done in an adult male patient presenting with rapidly
progressing or recent onset of painful gynecomastia. Lung cancer should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of gynecomastia attributable to ectopic
production of hCG beta subunit.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP311
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP312
Insipid diabetes and acute myeloid leukemia: genotypic/phenotypic
correlation?
Maria Manuel Costa1,2, Sandra Belo1,2, Pedro Souteiro1,2,
José Luís Castedo1,2 & Davide Carvalho1,2
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism of Centro
Hospitalar de São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Central diabetes insipidus (CDI) is a rare complication of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) occurring in less than 0.6% of patients. It is associated with genetic
changes in chromosomes 3 and 7. CDI may precede; occur simultaneously or after
the diagnosis of AML.
Case report
51-year-old man, with no relevant past medical history, began complaining with
polyuria, polydipsia, weakness and weight loss in March 2015.The patient was
evaluated in the emergency department in June and was discharged with the
diagnosis of urinary infection. As the complaints persisted he was again evaluated
presenting also dehydration and easy bruising. Analytical findings suggested
AML (Hb 8.8 g/dl, leukocytes 13.03!10!9/l, neutrophils 0.87, blasts 46%) with
karyotype 45,XY,inv (3) (q21q26), - 7 (20). He was admitted to Hematology
Department  and  began  chemotherapy.  He  also  had  hypernatremia,
159 mEq/l(135-145), with serum osmolality of 332 mosm/kg (282-300), urine
osmolality in the lower limit of normal 187 mosm/kg (50-1200) and negative
water balance, in this context endocrinology evaluation was requested. CDI was
suspected and the patient started desmopressin with resolution of hyponatremia,
polydipsia and polyuria. Pituitary CT revealed pituitary with normal morphology
and dimensions, although a low uptake area in the median/ right paramedian
region was assumed. He was discharged with oral desmopressin 0.06 mg bid.
Asas the patient did not show response to induction chemotherapy,he begun
salvage chemotherapy.Given the patient’s clinical context we decided not to
conduct water restriction test and pituitary MRI was also delayed.
Conclusion
In this case the symptoms of diabetes insipidus led to the diagnosis of AML.
There  are  descriptions  in  the  literature  that  these  cytogenetic  changes  are
associated with the development of DCI in AML,although the causes of this
association are not fully understood.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP312
EP313
Giant incidentally-detected non-functional adrenal myelolipoma - a
case report
Alina Mihaela Pascu, Mircea Daniel Hogea, Lorena Dima,
Petru Iulian Ifteni, Claudia Gavris & Marius Alexandru Moga
Transilvania University of Brasov, Faculty of Medicine, Brasov, Romania.
Introduction
Adrenal myelolipoma is a rare benign tumour composed of mature adipose tissue
and  haematopoietic  elements  developed  within  the  adrenal  gland,  usually
unilateral, asymptomatic, and non-functional. Their real incidence is unknown.
Case report
A 56 year-old female was admitted to our surgery department for abdominal
distension and the presence of a large palpable tumour in the right abdomen
discovered during an abdominal ultrasonographic check-up for an incisional
hernia, and with no noticeable symptoms. Patient’s medical history: a 3rd stage
systemic  arterial  hypertension,  insulin  requiring  type
2
diabetes  mellitus,
hysterectomy with adnexectomy for a cervical cancer. The abdominal ultrasound
examination showed a large hyperechogenic tumour, heterogenic, located in the
right flank and hypochondriac region.
The  contrast  enhanced  computed  tomography  scan  revealed  a  large  retro-
peritoneal tumour (25!17!21 cm) well delimitated with a heterogenic structure
(liquid and non-iodophile lipid densities, and central calcifications). The mass
was in contact with the right hepatic lobe, inferior vena cava, ascendant and
transverse colon, and, posteriorly, with the diaphragm. The CT showed also a
74 mm incisional hernia with incarcerated small bowel.
Biochemical  evaluation:  serum  potassiumZ4.2 mmol/l,  serum  cortisolZ
204.8 nmol/l; after a 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test serum
cortisolZ22.1 nmol/l.
Taking into account the tumoral mass dimensions, surgical resection was decided.
Because of the medial incisional hernia, a medial subxifoid-pubic incision was
performed.
Histopathological evaluation: macroscopic examination revealed a large thin
encapsulated tumour, firm in consistence, with a heteromorphic aspect with
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
calcifications in section; the microscopic examination: adrenal cortex, adipose
tissue, and multiple (extramedullary) haematopoiesis sites - adrenal myeloli-
poma. The patient had a good postoperative evolution.
Conclusion
The incidentally detected tumoral mass in the clinical condition of the patient
challenged  to  differentiate  an  adrenal  adenoma
(functional  or  not)  from  a
retroperitoneal  lipoma/liposarcoma,  or  metastasis.  A  particularity  of  this
myelolipoma was the tumour size (approx. 8.925 cm3).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP313
EP314
Early carbohydrate metabolism disorders in a patient with acromegaly
and family history of pituitary adenomas
Lubov Matchekhina, Tatiana Tarasova & Ekaterina Pigarova
Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Acromegaly is a chronic, debilitating disorder caused by excessive growth
hormone (GH) production predominantly due to a benign pituitary adenoma. The
overall annual incidence of acromegaly is approximately 3.3 cases/million, with a
prevalence  of
58-130  cases/million  people.  Early  carbohydrate  metabolism
disorders (ECMDs) are frequently associated with acromegaly. ECMDs - defined
as IFG, IGT or their combination - its prevalence in patients with acromegaly has
been shown to vary between 16 and 46%.
Case report
A 47-year old man with a family history of pituitary adenoma (father had a
somatotropinoma)  was  consulted  at  the  Endocrinology  Research  Centre  in
October 2015. He complained weight gain, reduction of libido, headaches, joint
pain and snore. Physical examination: height
186 cm, weight 113 kg, BMI
32.66 kg/m2. Laboratory and clinical investigations: GH (during OGTT) 0’ -
2.08 ng/ml,
30’
- 2.11 ng/ml,
60’
- 2.46 ng/ml,
90’
- 1.84 ng/ml,
120’
-
1.41 ng/ml (!1 ng/ml); IGF-1 - 1199 ng/ml (75-212). Brain MRI: pituitary
macroadenoma (2.8!3.0!3.0 cm). So, acromegaly was confirmed. Parallel
sequencing was performed with MEN1, CDKN1B, PRKAR1A, GNAS, AIP,
SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD genes determination. No significant mutations
were found; considering family history of pituitary adenomas genotyping might
be informative. Regarding possible metabolic complications, glucose during
OGTT was measured; Glu 0’ - 5.8 mmol/l, 120’ - 8.9 mmol/l - IGT was found.
Insulin - 40 mIU/l (2.3-26.4 mIU/l); C-peptide - 1.5 ng/ml (1.1-4.4).
Conclusions
Acromegalic patients are at high risk of developing ECMDs and secondary
diabetes, so they all should be examined using multidisciplinary approach to
prevent severe complications. As pituitary adenomas may be presented as FIPAs
- genetic analysis (if there is a suspicion) should be performed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP314
EP315
Posture-responsive primary aldosteronism - the utility of seated saline
suppression test
Iva Jakubikova1,2, Jiri Horacek1,2, Sylvie Spitalnikova5, Marek Ballon3,
Miroslav Lojik4, Filip Gabalec1,2 & Pavel Zak1,2
14th Department of Internal Medicine- Hematology, University Hospital
Hradec Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic;2Charles University of
Prague, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech
Republic;31st Department of Internal Medicine- Cardiology, University
Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic;4Radiology,
University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic;
5Private Internal Praxis, Chrudim, Czech Republic.
Introduction
The diagnostic procedure of primary aldosteronism (PA) includes one of four
confirmatory tests, of which the saline suppression test (SST) seems to be the most
convenient  one. Current  guidelines  recommend  SST  to  be  performed  in  a
recumbent position. However, a recent preliminary study demonstrated a higher
sensitivity of SST when performed in the upright (i.e. seated) position. Here, we
report a case of posture-responsive PA with a negative recumbent SST but clearly
positive seated SST.
Case report
A 60-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with the suspicion of PA, based
on her 10 years’ history of rather resistant arterial hypertension with hypokalemia,
together with a recent positive aldosterone/renin ratio (ARR) screening test and an
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
adrenal CT scan revealing a unilateral mass of 22!15 mm in her left adrenal
gland. On admission, the screening test was repeated; serum aldosterone level was
710 pmol/l and renin concentration was below detection limit. After an overnight
rest and potassium level correction, the recumbent SST (2000 ml of saline
infusion over 4 hours) was performed. Her aldosterone levels before and after the
infusion were 60 and 100 pmol/l, respectively, i.e. the confirmatory test was
negative. As our clinical suspicion was still high, we repeated the SST in the
upright (sitting) position. In this case the aldosterone levels before and after the
infusion were 894 and 657 pmol/l, respectively, while renin concentration stayed
suppressed below detection limit, i.e. clearly positive test. The unilateral form of
PA was then established by adrenal venous sampling (including cosyntropin
stimulation) and the operation is scheduled on the first week in February 2016.
Conclusion
As many patients may have a posture-responsive PA, the seated SST may be
preferable over recumbent SST, thus providing better sensitivity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP315
EP316
Adrenal medullary hyperplasia recognized initially as incydentaloma
Maria Kurowska1, Joanna Malicka1, Maciej Otto2, Jerzy S. Tarach1 &
Marcin Lewicki1
1Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland;
2Department of General, Vascular and Transplant Surgery,
Medical University, Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction
Adrenal medullary hyperplasia (AMH) is a rare syndrome of catecholamine
excess. Adrenal overgrowth is usually bilateral. Due to similar clinical signs,
laboratory results and radiological adrenal picture, AMH can be misdiagnosed as
pheochromocytoma. The only method that allows determining a proper diagnosis
of  AMH  is  pathologic  examination.  It  is  regarded  as  a  precursor  of
pheochromocytoma and has been reported as a component of MEN2.
Aim
The aim of the study was to present a patient with AMH primary diagnosed as
adrenal incydentaloma.
Case report
54-year-old female, without hypertension or other symptoms of catecholamine
excess, was admitted to our ward because of incidentally discovered nodular
masses [18!8 mm] in right adrenal gland. Initial tumor CT density was 36 HU
and after contrast administration it was in subsequent phases: 56, 78 and 55 HU
respectively. Left adrenal gland was normal. Oncologic vigilance was suggested.
Laboratory assessment excluded hormonal activity of the tumor and daily urinary
excretion of metoxycatecholamines was 675 mg (n!1000). After the patient was
prepared for surgery using doxazosine, laparoscopic left adrenalectomy has been
conducted.  A  postoperative  pathologic  exploration  revealed  solid  orange-
yellowish
8 mm  tumor.  Microscopic  evaluation  confirmed  nodular  adrenal
medullary hyperplasia, chromogranine (C), synaptofizyne (C). Because of the
risk of developing a tumor in the opposite adrenal gland further observation was
recommended.
Conclusion
AMH can develop without clinical symptoms of catecholamine excess and be
recognized as adrenal incydentaloma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP316
EP317
Bilateral large adrenal lesions in a patient with undertreated congenital
adrenal hyperplasia
Muhammet Cuneyt Bilginer, Didem Ozdemir, Cevdet Aydin, Reyhan Ersoy
& Bekir Cakir
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Yildirim Beyazit University
Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of autosomal recessive diseases
characterized by enzyme deficiencies in cortisol secretion. The most common
form  is
21-alpha  hydroxylase  deficiency.  Here,  we  report  a  patient  with
undertreated CAH and bilateral large adrenal masses.
Case report
34 years old male patient diagnosed with CAH and testicular anorchia at the age
of 7 admitted to our clinic for general weakness. Hydrocortisone treatment was
started at the diagnosis but he never used it regularly and was not taking
glucocorticoid replacement for 10 years. In physical examination, blood pressure
was 100/70 mmHg, there was diffuse hyperpigmentation, and no testicular tissue
could be palpated. In laboratory examination, fasting blood glucose was 97 mg/dl,
sodium 143 mmol/l, K 4.5 mmol/l and renal, liver and thyroid functions were
normal. His serum cortisol, adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) and 17-OH
progesteron  levels  were
4.8 mcg/dl,
366 pg/ml  and  217 ng/ml,  respectively.
Serum aldosteron was low and and renin was high. In abdominal MRI, there were
hypertrophied adrenal glands with solid nodular lesions of 47!44 mm in right
and 22!24 mm in left glands. Pheochromocytoma was excluded by normal
24 hour urinary catecholamines. 17-OH progesteron decreased to 40.8 ng/ml after
2 months of 0.5 mg/day dexamethasone treatment.
Conclusion
Although, adrenal enlargement is an expected finding in untreated CAH due to
excessive ACTH secretion, adrenal lesions are rarely observed. CAH should be
included in the differential diagnosis of large bilateral adrenal lesions to avoid
unnecessary adrenalectomies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP317
EP318
Usefulness of the 4-mg intravenous dexamethasone suppression test in
differentiating Cushing disease from pseudo-Cushing syndrome - a case
report
Ines Bilic-Curcic1,2, Marija Tripolski2 & Tatjana Bacun1,2
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia;2University
Hospital Center Osijek, Osijek, Croatia.
Distinguishing Cushing disease from pseudo-Cushing syndrome still remains a
challenge, especially in some specific cases when absorption or compliance of
dexamethasone used in diagnostical tests are questionable. Several versions of an
intravenous
(IV)  test  have  been  utilized  and  serve  both  in the  initial  and
differential diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome.
We report a 59-year-old patient with macroadenoma of pituitary gland (revealed
accidentally on MRI due to dizziness and headaches)
26!18 mm in size,
compressing infundibulum and sella, probably adenoma according to radiological
characteristics. Her medical history revealed surgical resection of stomach due to
a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) in 1998, arterial hypertension since 1998,
and diabetes type 2 (DMT2) diagnosed a year ago adequately regulated with
metformine  only.  On  her  physical  exam,  she  did  not  have  any  signs  of
endocrinopathy, BMI was 25 kg/m2, however cortisol was not suppressible in the
overnight dexamethasone suppression test, followed by the same result in low
dose dexamethasone test. Since she did not have any signs of hypercortisolemia
except a relatively newly diagnosed DMT2, and absorption of orally ingested
drugs was questionable, we decided to perform an IV overnight suppression test
with 4 mg of dexamethasone which confirmed diagnosis of Cushing disease
(cortisol 421 nmol/l). Other hormone test showed tireotropic and gonadotropic
insufficiency. Transsphenoidal surgical removal of tumor was performed and
control MRI showed no tumor residua while patohistological finding confirmed
diagnosis of corticotropinoma.
Our patient presented with macroadenoma producing ACTH which are rare
especially when presenting as silent macrocorticotropinomas. This is an educative
example to keep in mind IV dexamethasone suppression test which could be easy
and accurate tool in distinguishing patients with Cushing disease and pseudo-
Cushing syndrome while at the same time avoiding the potential difficulties of
drug compliance and absorption with oral dexamethasone.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP318
EP319
Hair loss after transesphenoidal surgery in patient with cured
acromegaly
Milagros Sierra, Maria Calatayud, Gonzalo Allo & Federico Hawkins
12 Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
Hair loss after surgical treatment for acromegaly has been rarely described. We
report a case of a patient with acromegaly that presented with hair loss after
surgical treatment.
We describe a case of a 73-year female that was diagnosed with acromegaly.
Transesphenoidal surgery was performed with complete tumour resection and no
immediate complications. Postoperative IGF -1, GH and OGTT for GH were
measured at 12 weeks confirming biochemical remission. The rest of the pituitary
axis  remained  within  normal  range.  Four months  after  surgery  the patient
presented with diffuse scalp hair loss, predominantly in the frontoparietal area,
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
and complete loss of eyebrows. She was diagnosed of a telogen effluvium. At the
same time she was diagnosed with depression. We performed a basic laboratory
evaluation, which ruled out other etiologies than might cause hair loss. Three
months after the initial evaluation, she did not show signs of recovery neither in
the frontal parietal area, nor in her eyebrows.
Studies have shown that IGF-1 may play an important roll in the development and
preservation of the hair follicle. Hair loss has been reported as an adverse effect of
somatostatin analog therapy. Even though the mechanisms are still unknown, a
drop in the IGF-1 levels could be implicated in both cases. Due to the association
between hair loss and the drop of IGF-1 levels, this event could be considered as
an indirect sign of remission. It is important to assess the initial hair status to
prevent low self-esteem that can cause depression and improve the knowledge of
this entity. Questioning patients about hair loss could help us make an early
diagnosis, understand its natural history, frequency and risk factors.
Keywords: hair loss, acromegaly, transesphenoidal surgery
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP319
EP320
A case of Cushing syndrome: long-time before being diagnosed
ultimately in despite of abdominoplasty and reduction mammoplasty
Seyid Ahmet Ay1, Kamil Baskoy1, Veysel Ozalper2, Ferhat Deniz1 &
Arif Yonem1
1Endocrinology and Metabolism, Haydarpasa Training Hospital, Gulhane
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey,2Internal Medicine, Haydarpasa
Training Hospital, Gulhane School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Cushing’s disease (CD) is rare systemic disease characterized by an endogenous
hypercortisolism and it is the most common cause of Cushing’s syndrome (CS).
CS is encountered more often in women than in men, associated with an increased
morbidity and mortality. Hence, early diagnosis and proper management of the
condition is crucial. Here, we present a case of CD, who had abdominoplasty and
reduction mammoplasty but went undiagnosed long time with correct diagnosis.
Case
A 43-year-old female patient applied to our outpatient clinic, complaining of
obesity.  Previously  she  had  abdominoplasty  and  reductive  mammoplasty
operations for obesity. She had a BMI of 39.43 kg/m2. She had such physical
features as abdominal striae, moon face and buffalo hump, suggesting CS. Her
basal levels of cortisol and ACTH were normal, but there were no suppression
with overnight 1 mg and 2-days 2 mg dexamethasone tests. Daily urinary cortisol
excretion was high (348 mg/day, ref. range: 36-137). Late-night cortisol level
was 6.5 mg/dl. With 8-mg dexamethasone, serum cortisol decreased by 50%
compared to basal level, suggesting a pituitary source. Then, MRI showed a
left-sided  pituitary  mass,  measuring
10 mm.  Thereafter,  the  patient  was
underwent transphenoidal surgery. Pathological examination of the specimen
was compatible with corticotroph adenoma. Three months after operation, the
patient’s  weight  decreased
15 kgs,  and  physical  features  suggesting  CS
disappeared significantly. Basal levels of cortisol and ACTH decreased, together
with normal responses to suppressive doses of dexamethasone. Also, MRI showed
no residual mass in the pituitary and the case ordered to have regular follow-ups.
Conclusion
CS is a systemic disease, manifested with mainly progressive central obesity.
Although  obesity  is  so  prevalent  health  problem,  the  investigation  for  the
presence of underlying CS is generally regarded as not cost-effective and often
overlooked.  Consequently,  its  associated  obesity  may  not  be  improved
substantially. Therefore, we may suggest that not all obese patients but having
features suggesting CS should be evaluated for the presence of CS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP320
EP321
Sellar hemangiopericytoma mimicking non-functional pituitary
adenoma
Zelal Sahin Tirnova1, Ozen Oz Gul2, Pinar Sisman2, Aybuke Muti1,
Erdinc Erturk2 & Canan Ersoy2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Uludag University Medical School,
Bursa, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Uludag University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey.
Background
Hemangiopericytoma (HPC) is a malignant vasculary tumor originate from
pericytes around the capillary and venules. İntracranial hemangiopericytomas
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
usually arise from meninges, rarely they locate periventricular, suprasellar or
sellar.  Because  of  the  malignancy  potential,  the  differential  diagnosis  is
important. A rare case of sellar HPC mimicking non-functional pituitary adenoma
will be presented.
Case report
A 45 years old woman has admitted to our hospital complaining about two year’s
ongoing amenorea, spontaneous galactorea and one month ongoing headache.
Hypocortisolism was detected at the hormonal tests and ACTH stimulation test
was performed. The hypocortisolism was verified and we gave steroid therapy to
the patient. The other hormonal tests were normal. The 3!2 cm suprasellar, well
demarcated, predominantly solid with multiple cystic areas mass lesion extending
into the sellar was shown at the MRI images. Because of the sudden vision loss,
the  patient  was  operated  as  an  emergency,  the  prediagnosis  was  pituitary
apoplexia. Because of the bleeding, the mass could not been totally resected at the
procedure. There was residual mass at the post-operative MRI images but the
visual examination was improved postoperatively. Central hypothyroidism was
seen after the operation so we gave the patient levotyhroxine therapy. The
pathological diagnosis was HPC. The patient developed acute vision after 2
months, so another surgical procedure was performed. The pathological diagnosis
was HPC again.
Discussion
HPC arising from central nervous system (CNS) form less than 1% of intracranial
tumors and less than 2.5% of the meningeal tumors and are rarely diagnosed
preoperatively. HPC relapses in many cases and metastasizes to other parts of the
body. Because of the aggressivity of this tumor, it relapses locally even after total
resection and metastasizes to CNS or other parts of the body. Patients that
received radiotherapy (RT) have better local control, disease-free survival, and
overall survival rates. İn selected cases chemotherapy can be discussed at the
patients who had recurrence after RT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP321
EP322
Malignant giant pituitary tumor
Adina Mazilu
Central Military Emergency Hospital, Buarestch, Romania.
Introduction
Malignant tumors of pituitary are very rare diseases.
Case report
We present the case of a 37 years male that progressed in 6 months from normal
life to erectile dysfunction and severe panic attacks. The lab panel showed severe
insufficiency of testosterone and thyroid hormones. MRI examination revealed
a large pituitary tumor, extending to hypothalamus and temporal lobe, also to
cavernous  sinus.  The  tumor  was  treated  for
30
days  with  Cabergoline
3.5 mg/week, then successfully resected without diabetes insipidus or neurologic
defects.  Patient  recovered  from  panic  attacks  and  needs  substitution  with
50 mcg/day of Levothyroxine, 5 mg/day Prednisone and 80 mg/day of Undestor.
Pathology revealed a malignant pituitary tumor on IHC.
Conclusions
Patient’s evolution was better than the evolution we predicted initially, with good
quality of life, except for persistent tinnitus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP322
EP323
Pituitary and legg calvé perthes syndrome - is there a connexion?
Mirela Puiu1, Alina Belceanu1, Iulia Crumpei1, Anamaria Bursuc1,
Ioana Armasu1, George-Sebastian Zmau1, Mihaela Anton2,
Simona Gavrilescu3 & Carmen Vulpoi1
1Department of Endocrinology, Iasi, Romania;2Department of
Endocrinology, Bacau, Romania;3Children’s Emergency Hospital
‘St. Maria’, Iasi, Romania.
Introduction
Legg calvé perthes (LCP) is a disease characterized by idiopathic avascular
necrosis of the proximal femoral epiphysis caused by decreased blood flow. More
frequently in boys between 2 and 12 years of age. LCPD is of unknown etiology.
We present two male patients of LCP associated with pituitary disorders.
Case presentation
Case  1:  g.i.c.,
8 years
8 month,  was  first  addressed  to  the  endocrinology
department  for  investigations  of  growth  retardation.  Clinical  examination
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
revealed: short stature (K3.2 ds), facial dysmorphism, uneven legs (right! left
with 2 cm), right hip pain, no sign of pubertal onset. Radiological examination
revealed osteonecrosis of the right femoral head and delayed bone age of w 7
years. Somatotropic axis investigations revealed low igf-1 (48 ng/dl, nZ64-345).
Case 2: n.g.a., 20 years 11 months, with significant orthopedic medical history (6
years: left proximal femoral epiphysiolysis, 19 years: LCP disease of the left hip),
was  addressed  to  the  endocrinology  department for  bilateral  galactorrhoea,
obesity, intermittent headache. The clinical examination revealed: obesity (bmiZ
36 kg/mp), shorter left leg compared to right leg, right coxa valga, bilateral genu
valgum, pubertal stage iv-v (loss of pubic and facial hair, thin voice, erectile
dysfunction, reduced testicular volume). Biology confirmed hyperprolactinemia
(prlO150 ng/ml,  nZ2.5-17)  with  hypogonadotropic  hypogonadism
(fshZ
0.492 mUI/ml,  nZ0.7-11.1,  l hZ0.764 mUI/ml,  nZ0.8-7.6,  testoster-
onZ1.3 ng/ml,  nZ2.8-8);  the  other  pituitary  functions  were  normal.  Mri
described a pituitary macroadenoma (23/23/22 mm). Cabergoline treatment was
started with good results (prl!0.5 ng/ml).
Discussion
LCP  is associated  with short stature  and  decreased  growth  velocity, some
literature data considering igf1 deficiency as a causal factor of the osteonecrosis.
This affirmation is controversial since GH treatment may induce femoral necrosis.
Whatever the causal association, the presence of LCP impose caution in the short
stature treatment. We did not find connexions between LCP and prolactinoma,
however the concomitance of the two lesions may suggest a yet unknown
correlation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP323
EP324
Hirsutism and adrenocortical carcinoma (acc): a particular case report
José Pérez-Rodríguez1, Pedro Yunta-Abarca2, María del Carmen Soriano3,
David Martín-Iglesias1, Dulce María Calderón-Vicente1,
Mubarak Alrramadan1 & Santiago Aranda-Regules
1Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Virgen de la Luz Hospital,
Cuenca, Spain;2General Surgery Department, Virgen de la Luz Hospital,
Cuenca, Spain;3Oncology Department, Virgen de la Luz Hospital, Cuenca,
Spain.
Introduction
ACC is a rare tumour with a incidence of 0.7-2.0/per million, more common in
women between 40 and 50 years. Can be diagnosis as a incidentaloma or for clinic
of abdominal pain and autonomous o hormone secretion symptoms (Cushing
syndrome and hirsutism). We present the management of a particular case of
hirsutism for ACC.
Case report
Sixty four year old woman referring increase hair and a deeper voice for 1 year.
As personal antecedents include hypertension (treated with four drugs) and
kidney stones. On physical examination she presents BMI 31 kg/m2, blood
pressure 157/87 mmHG, Ferriman Galway WITH 14 points, and no signs of
hypercortisolism.  In  the  hormonal  profile  highlights:  DHEA
8.01 mg/ml,
androstenedione  O10 ng/ml,  testosterone
3.83 ng/ml,  cortisol  after
1 mg  of
dexamethasone 12.2 mg/dl, urinary cortisol 34.2 mg/24 h, 17-OH progesterone
8.28 ng/ml and 11 dexosicortisol 27 ng/ml. Catecholamines, metanephrines and
renin/aldosterone  axis  were  normal.  Body  CT  with  contrast  shows  a
heterogeneous mass adrenal of 8 cm maximun diameter with a density of 75 H,
without lymphadenopathy or metastasis. The patient is operated by laparotomy
performing  right  adrenalectomy  with  complete  resection.  Corticosteroid
replacement downward is performed. The pathology reaches four criteria Weiss
(nuclear  grade III, multifocal necrosis, venous invasion muscular  wall and
capsular invasion). Ki 67 (C) was 10-15%. It is diagnosed of ACC completely
respected stage II. The patient refuses adjuvant treatment with mitotane and
decided closely monitored. At one year follow hormonal markers were normal
and CT hadn’t show signs of recurrence. Gradually returned hirsutism and
hypertension is controlled with dual therapy.
Conclusions
The ACC is a malignant and aggressive tumor with poor prognosis especially in
advanced. Complete resection is the best guarantee of cure. Mitotane is the first
line drug as adjuvant therapy, but its role is unclear when complete resection can
be performed. In our case it was decided to closely monitor whitin signs of
recurrence at 1 year. Finally, more studies are needed to improve and clarify the
role of adjuvant therapy in ACC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP324
EP325
Association of TSH secreting adenoma and meningioma: a case report
Nesrine Cheikhrouhou, Leila Ben Salem, Emna Haouat, Haifa Sfar,
Ines Kamoun & Claude Ben Slama
National Institute of Nutrition, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
TSH-secreting  pituitary  adenomas  are  rare  pituitary  functioning  tumors
accounting for !2% of the pituitary adenomas. Their association to meningiomas
is a very rare condition.
We report a case of 55-year-old woman who had multinodular goiter with mild
symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Blood tests showed inappropriate secretion of
TSH and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a pituitary tumor with
maximum diameter of 13 mm that was extirpated through transsphenoidal route.
After operation fT4 levels were still high and MRI showed persistence of residual
tumor and a right parasagittal meningioma was detected. Treatment options are
discussed.
Conclusion
Association of meningioma to TSH secreting adenoma is rare but can make
difficult  the  treatment  of  persistence  adenoma.  Radiotherapy  as  well  as
somatostatin receptors agonists can stimulate the growth of meningioma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP325
EP326
Anomalous venous drainage another difficulty for the diagnosis of
Cushing’s Syndrome
Lorena Suarez Gutiérrez1, Joaquin Pertierra de La Uz2, Juan Luis
Fernandez Morera2, Cecilia Sanchez Ragnarson2 & Edelmiro
Menendez Torre2
1Hospital de Cabuen˜ es, Gijón, Asturias, Spain;2Hospital Central de
Asturias, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
Introduction
It is known that about 75% of cases of endogenous Cushing síndorme to a
pituitary adenoma (HA) ACTH-producing, 15% to ectopic ACTH and 10% is due
to adrenal adenoma.
Case
The patient was 64 years old, derived from Diabetes Mellitus type 2 of about 16
years of history with an unwieldyChypertension diagnosed in 2007 with no
physical signs compatible with hypercortisolism and incidentally detected a left
adrenal  adenoma
2 cm.  Hormonal  blood  studied  found:  Nugent  test:20.9.
Morning Cortisol: 11.2; morning ACTH.: 21.7; evening Cortisol.: 11.3; evening
ACTH.: 14.7; Free cortisol 24 h urine(UCF): 713 (36-137). After supression
2 mg of dexametasona four 6 h: UCF 24H: 483 and morning cortisol 10.3.
Finally, after
8 mg. DXM at 23 h: Morning Cortisol: 23. In MRI pituitary
microadenoma left 3 mm. so petrosal sinuses catheterization there is no clear
lateralization and showed anomalous venous drainage. To rule ectopic Cushing,
scan were performed with somatostatin receptors (negative), In CT existence of a
millimeter  thoracic  nodule  in  the  LSI  without  observing  other  injuries
suprarrrenal adenoma and left unchanged in size.
After  many  studies,  we  decided  to  repeat  like  pituitary  MRI,  so  after
pharmacological  control:  Ketoconazole
200 mg  (2-1-1),  metopirone
250 mg
(3-2-2) intervention was decided transsphenoidal with disappearance of injury in
MRI.
Discussion
Petrosal sinus catheterization is the most effective means of diagnosis of pituitary
Cushing vs ectopic. But it should not be considered definitive for the diagnosis
because i like in this case had an abnormal venous drainage not help the diagnosis.
Moreover, as in this case the size of AH !1 cm detection depends interobserver
variability. Therefore, as in this case we must evaluate the results together to
reach the final diagnosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP326
Clinical case reports - Thyroid/Others
EP327
A rare case of infertility - SRY positive, 46,XX testicular disorder of
sexual differentiation
Delia Bogdanet, Thomas Griffin & Marcia Bell
Galway University Hospital, Galway, Ireland.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
The testicular disorder of sexual differentiation (DSD) is a rare clinical condition
with a reported incidence of 1:20 000 newborn males. It is characterised by a male
phenotype with 46,XX karyotype. There are three clinical phenotypes: normal
male  phenotype,  males  with  genital  ambiguities  and  males  who  are  true
hermaphrodites.  SRY  positive
46,XX  testicular  DSD  results  from  the
translocation of a Y chromosome segment containing the SRY gene during
spermatogenesis.  In  rare  cases,  the  SRY  gene  may  be  misplaced  onto  a
chromosome other than the X chromosome.
Case report
A 33 years old male presented with his wife to the fertility clinic with a 3 years
history of primary infertility. The patient’s wife had no significant past medical
history, her clinical examination was unremarkable and her biochemical and
hormonal investigations were all normal. The patient had a past medical history of
appendicectomy, lumbar discopathy and undescended testes in childhood. There
was no significant family history. He had normal libido and sexual function.
Clinical examination revealed a normal height and bilateral small testes. His total
testosterone was 6.7 nmol/l, LH was 4.4 IU/l and FSH was 43.1 IU/l. A sample
was sent for sperm analysis which revealed azoospermia. His viral screen was
negative. Genetic analysis for cystic fibrosis was negative. The patient was sent
for chromosomal analysis and karyotyping using fluorescence in situ hybrid-
ization (FISH) technique. This revealed a 46XX SRY positive karyotype through
translocation of the SRY gene between the X and the Y chromosome - 46,XX
der(X)t(X;Y)(p22.3;p11.3)(SRYC).
Conclusion
Patients with azoospermia should be karyotyped. Sperm donation remains a
fertility treatment option for patients with DSD and had a successful outcome in
this patient. Such patients require lifelong follow-up led by an endocrinologist
with  regular  imaging  of  their  gonads,  bone  density  measurements,  and
testosterone supplementation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP327
EP328
Diabetic gastroparesis - a pregnancy in jeopardy
Daniela Magalha˜es1,2, Rita Bettencourt-Silva1,2, Maria Manuel Costa1,2,
Ana Saavedra1,2, Sandra Belo1,2, Joana Queirós1, Paula Freitas1,2,
Gabriela Namora3, Nuno Montenegro3 & Davide Carvalho1,2
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism of Centro
Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Department of Obstetrics and Maternal and Fetal
Health of Centro Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Diabetic gastroparesis (DGP) is defined by delayed gastric emptying in the
absence of mechanical obstruction caused by autonomic neuropathy. Only 5% of
type 1 and 1% of type 2 diabetic patients combine the delay of gastric emptying
with typical gastroparesis symptoms. This entity is usually identified in patients
with least 10 years of diabetes evolution and is presented typically in the 4th to 5th
decades of life in type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). It is associated with marked
glycemic lability and it has significant morbidity.
Case report
A 32-year-old woman with a history of T1DM with 13 years of evolution, with
poor metabolic control due to noncompliance with A1c 8-9%. After one year of
functional insulin therapy she has improved her median A1c to z6.5%. No target
organ lesions were known. In the previous 6 months she was hospitalized two
times due to nausea and vomits. She performed a scintigraphy that revealed
serious gastric emptying delay (100% radiopharmaceutical retention at 3 hours)
and an endoscopy that showed gastric stasis with large amount of food in the
gastric cavity (11-hours fasting). She was diagnosed with DGP and initiated
treatment with domperidone before meals. Although she was advised about the
pregnancy contraindication, she became pregnant and presented with significant
worsening of symptoms with food intolerance and electrolyte disturbances and
was  admitted  to  the  hospital  at
7 weeksC6  days  (estimated  gestation)  of
pregnancy. She started combined therapy with metoclopramide, domperidone,
ondansetron, droperidol, erythromycin and dexamethasone. As she kept food
intolerance and developed malnutrition, parenteral nutrition was initiated at
8 weeksC6 days. Given the lack of therapy response, pregnancy interruption at
10 weeksC2 days was decided after multidisciplinary assessment.
Conclusions
DGP can be associated with significant morbidity with weight loss, malnutrition
and severe acid-base and electrolyte imbalances. Pregnancy in these patients can
lead to death in extreme cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP328
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP329
Improvement of glucose metabolism by pioglitazone in a patient with
lipoatrophic diabetes, increased plasma leptin and adiponectin levels,
and subcutaneous axillary lipomas
Hisashi Sugano1, Yoshinori Tuchiyama1 & Fukata Junichi2
1Kochi Health Scienses Center, Kochi, Japan;2Sanai Hospital, Kochi,
Japan.
Introduction
Generalized lipodystrophies are rare disorders characterized by almost total loss
of adipose tissue, and they are often accompanied by metabolic complications
such as severe insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus, hypertriglyceridemia, and
fatty liver.
Case report
We diagnosed a 17-year-old woman whose subcutaneous adipose tissue began to
decrease in her late elementary school days with the acquired and generalized
types  of  idiopathic  lipoatrophic  diabetes.  She  had  no  family history  of
lipoatrophy. She had extreme insulin resistance, fatty liver, hyperlipidemia, and
an increased basal metabolic rate in addition to a decreased subcutaneous fat
mass, partial white hair, acanthosis nigricans, hyperkeratinized skin of the fingers
and toes, and arachnodactyly. On first examination, height was 164 cm, weight
was 43 kg, fasting plasma glucose level was 100 mg/dl, glycated hemoglobin
(HbA1c) level was 6.7%, and fasting immunoreactive insulin level was 80 IU/ml.
Her serum insulin level gradually decreased, her glycemic control worsened, and
her HbA1c level increased above 12% even with 1000 U of insulin per day. To
overcome this severe insulin resistance, we added pioglitazone hydrochloride to
the insulin therapy. Her glycemic control successfully improved along with an
increase in the serum leptin (before and after pioglitazone medication: 4.5 and
9.6 ng/dl, respectively) and adiponectin levels (1.24 and 3.10 mg/ml, respect-
ively). After starting pioglitazone, subcutaneous axillary lipomas on both sides of
her body (right 9.7 ! 7.6 cm, left 7.1 ! 6.4 cm) were found, and fatty liver was
improved.
Conclusions
Pioglitazone (thiazolidinedione) is a ligand for peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-g a nuclear receptor expressed mainly in adipocytes that promotes their
development. In the present case, pioglitazone caused proliferation of the rest of
the adipocytes and subcutaneous axillary lipoma growth. The current case also
demonstrated that the metabolic complications of lipoatrophic diabetes can be
partially resolved with pioglitazone treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP329
EP330
Importance of levothyroxine absorption test in identifying
malabsorption as a cause of inadequate substitution for hypothyroidism
Tijana Lalic1, Jasmina Ciric1,2, Biljana Beleslin1,2, Mirjana Stojkovic1,2,
Slavica Savic1, Tanja Nisic1, Milos Stojanovic1,2, Marija Barac1 &
Milos Zarkovic1,2
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Belgrade,
Serbia;2School of Medicine, Belgrade University, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
The most common cause for persistent elevation of TSH levels in hypothyroid
patients  treated  with  levothyroxine  is  poor  compliance.  The  levothyroxine
absorption test (LAT) is usually confirmed this phenomenon called “pseudo-
malabsorption”.
Case report
Sixty-year-old female, weight 60 kg, BMI 24.3 kg/m2, presented with sleepiness,
tiredness, fatigue and forgetfulness. Her skin was very dry and flaky. She had low
tolerance of effort, poor appetite with weight oscillation around 2 kg, constipation
and sometimes heartburn. Hypothyroid for ten years after radioiodine treatment of
Grave´ disease. Her TSH levels were higher than normal, TSH 20-70 mIU/l, in
spite of efforts to adjust the dose (different LT4 preparations). In last two years her
daily LT4 dose was 900 mg (15 mg/kg), 3!300 mg then 500C400 mcg. She is
also under treatment for depression, angina, hypertension, absolutely arrhythmias
(with inadequate INR in last two months). Before testing TSH 33.6 mIU/l, FT4
4.25 pmol/l. Standard (1 mg) LAT was performed under supervision. TSH, T4
and FT4 were measured 2 h, 4 h, 6 h and 24 h upon LT4 administration. Baseline
values  were  TSH
26.92 mIU/l;  FT4
4.4 pmol/l;  T4
41.5 pmol/l.  Cmax  T4
88.6 pmol/l was in 1200 . The end point values were TSH 29.37 mIU/l; FT4
7.2 pmol/l; T4 61.9 pmol/l. The lack of TSH fall and slight increase in T4 and
FT4, significantly below expected AUC, pointed an inadequate absorption. After
testing, it was started with 300 mg LT4 oral suspension. The presence of fat in the
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
stool and positive antiparietal antibodies increased suspicion to malabsorptiv
syndrome. EGDS was performed and PH finding confirmed H. pylori positive
chronic  atrophic  gastritis  with  micro  focal  intestinal  metaplasia  without
morphological elements for GSE. Eradication treatment and IPP were introduced.
After 4 weeks her thyroid hormones were TSH 1.63 mIU/l; FT4 26.6 pmol/l, FT3
3.87 pmol/l.
Conclusion
LAT is useful for identifying much rare malabsorption, so the adequate treatment
could lead to proper substitution and avoidance of no rationale increase of
levothyroxine dose.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP330
EP331
Overdiagnosis of osteoporosis in a patient with short stature and partial
growth hormone insensitivity due to misinterpretation of dual-energy
X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)
Paraskevi Floroskoufi1, Vasiliki Daraki1, John Stratakis2, George Kalikakis1
& Stathis Papavasiliou1
1Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University
Hospital of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece;2Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Medical Physics, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete,
Greece.
Introduction
Bone densitometry is currently one of the mainstays in the evaluation of systemic
bone diseases. The most frequently assessed densitometric parameter is areal
bone mineral density (BMD), measured by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry
(DEXA) and expressed as g/cm2. However BMD is a bone size-dependent
measure and may be found inappropriately low in children and adults with short
stature. Osteopenia/osteoporosis have been described in patients with short stature
due to growth hormone insensitivity syndrome (GHIS) caused by mutations in the
GH receptor gene or its downstream mediators. Estimated volumetric bone
density (BMAD), expressed as g/cm3, is thought to be more accurate than DEXA
in interpreting areal bone density in GHIS patients.
Case report
A 47-years-old  woman  was  admitted  to  our  clinic  for  investigation  of
premenopausal osteoporosis. She had performed a DEXA due to bone pains,
which revealed severe osteoporosis (lumbar spine T-score:K2.9, femoral neck
T-score:K3). On physical examination she had short stature (1.47 cm) with
normal BMI, thin lips and small chin. She had no previous history of intrauterine
growth retardation. Hormonal investigation for short stature, revealed elevated
level of basal serum GH concentration in repeated measurements, while IGF-1
and IGF-BP3 values were low, supporting a diagnosis of partial growth hormone
insensitivity syndrome. No other hormone disorders were identified except mild
elevation of FSH/LH and mild vitamin D insufficiency. The rest of the laboratory
tests were normal. X-ray of lumbar and thoracic spine revealed no fracture.
Estimated BMAD at the spine and femoral neck indicated osteopenia (lumbar
spine T-score:K1.94, femoral neck T-score:K2.32). She was treated with vitamin
D and calcium supplements.
Conclusion
The described case highlights the difficulties in the appropriate assessment of
bone density in patients with short stature and partial GHIS. The use of the right
technique is of great importance in order to avoid over treatment of these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP331
EP332
A novel clinical phenotype of acquired partial lipodystrophy associated
with intensive childhood cytostatic treatment
Michiel Nijhoff1,2, Eleonora Corssmit1, Marloes Louwerens3, Ingrid Jazet3
& Alberto Pereira1
1LUMC, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology,
Leiden, The Netherlands;2LUMC, Department of Internal Medicine,
Division of Nephrology and Transplantation, Leiden, The Netherlands;
3LUMC, Department of Internal Medicine, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Context
Lipodystrophy is characterized by subcutaneous fat loss, fat maldistribution, and
metabolic  syndrome.  We  present  a  novel  phenotype  of  partial  acquired
lipodystrophy, possibly associated with childhood chemotherapy.
Case reports
Two adult female patients that had been exposed to intensive cytostatic treatment
in childhood for leukemia and aplastic anemia, respectively, were referred for
therapy resistant diabetes. Both patients had distinct partial lipodystrophy at the
hips  and  distal  extremities  with  severe  hypertension,  insulin  resistance,
dyslipidemia, and steatohepatitis. BMI was normal. Leptin levels were increased
in both patients without evidence for auto-immunity or known pathogenic DNA
mutations. Pioglitazone treatment reversed all features of the metabolic syndrome
in the first patient. Pioglitazone could not be initiated in the second patient due to
myocardial ischemia.
Conclusion
Lipodystrophy  may  be  associated  with  intensive  cytostatic  treatment  in
childhood,  since  this  phenotype,  characterized  by  loss  of fat  tissue  of  the
extremities and buttocks in the presence of elevated (instead of low) leptin levels,
did not match previously reported types of lipodystrophy. As the number of
patients that survive childhood cancer increases, this association might well
become relevant.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP332
EP333
Renal form of pseudohypoaldosteronism type I in suckling: clinical case
Galina Meraai & Anzhalika Solntsava
Belorussian State University of Medicine, Minsk, Belarus.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism is one of the least explored  questions in clinical
endocrinology. That leads to complexity in diagnosis and differential diagnostics
of disease. A boy, aged 13 days was admitted to the hospital with complains:
vomiting, low weight gain, constipation. Biochemical blood assay (BBA) and
acid-base balance of blood: level of sodium K127 mmol/l (N 132 - 145 mmol/l),
potassium K6.6 mmol/l (N 3.1 - 5.1 mmol/l), chlorine - 94.7 mmol/l (98-
107 mmol/l), pH - 7.42 (N 7.35 - 7.45). Clinical blood analysis, clinical urine
analysis, thyroid hormones, coagulation profile were within normal limits. Values
of 17-pregnenoldione in blood K4.09 and 2.57 nmol/l (N 0.7 - 2.3 nmol/l),
adrenocorticotropic  hormone
(ACTH)  K9.61 pmol/l  (N  7.2  -  63.3 pmol/l),
cortisol - 76.5 and 324 nmol/l (N 140 - 600 nmol/l), dehydroepiandrosteronum-
sulfate - 252.1 mg/dl (N 31.6 - 214 mg/dl). Diagnosis was made: salt-losing form
of congenital adrenal cortical hyperplasia. Fludrocortisone and hydrocortisone
were given. BBA after treatment: level of sodium - 127 mmol/l and potassium -
6.8 mmol/l. Values of ACTH in blood (34.9 pmol/l), aldosterone (2772 ng/l,
N 300 - 1900 ng/l), renin (128 pg/ml, N 4.66 - 31.9 pg/ml) were measured.
Resistance  of  electrolyte  disturbances  was  marked  on  glucocorticoid  and
mineralocorticoid treatment. The final clinical diagnosis was made: renal form
of pseudohypoaldosteronism type I (based on complains, level of sodium and
potassium, values of  ACTH,  aldosterone and renin  in  blood,  resistance  of
electrolyte  disturbances  was  marked  on  treatment  of  glucocorticoid  and
mineralocorticoid). Gradual dose decline of fludrocortisone and hydrocortisone
to full drug withdrawal; solution of Sodium Chloride 0.9% peroral (100 ml within
24 hours) were recommended. The child (2 months 13 days) was discharged from
the hospital in compensated condition.
Conclusions
Early diagnosis of pseudohypoaldosteronism permits to start treatment timely and
to improve prognosis, to reduce the risk of physical and psychomotor retardation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP333
EP334
Erdheim-Chester disease and papillary thyroid carcinoma: case report
of a common association in a rare disease
David Aparício1,2, Nuno Martins1, Carlos Leichsenring1, Alice Rodrigues1,
Ana João1, António Soares1, Marta Fragoso1, Rui Marinho1,
Ricardo Rocha1, Marta Sousa1, Serguei Gouminski1, Cisaltina Sobrinho1,
Wima Dias1, Énio Afonso1, Vasco Geraldes1 & Vitor Nunes1
1Hospital Professor Doutor Fernando da Fonseca, Lisboa/Amadora,
Portugal;2Nova Medical School, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introdution
Erdheim-Chester disease is a rare multisystemic form of Non-langerhans cell
histiocytosis CD67 positive, with approximately 550 published cases. Papillary
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
carcinoma is the most common thyroid cancer with BRAF V600E the most
common mutation. Both diseases may be associated to BRAF V600E mutation.
If Erdheim- Chester disease is positive to this mutation on histiocytes, a specific
pharmacolgical treatment is available, (vemurafenib), with better results.
Case report
We present a 69 years old woman with previous diagnosis of negative BRAF
Erdheim-Chester disease. During follow up of the disease, a hypodense nodule
without suspicious signs was identified in the thyroid. The patient had a fine
needle aspiration of the nodule, being diagnosed a papillary carcinoma. The
patient was submitted to a total thyroidectomy, having been discharged at day
four without any complication. She was submitted to radioative iodine. Papillary
carcinoma was positive for BRAF V600E mutation. Follow up of 1 year without
recurrence of thyroid cancer.
Conclusion
With this case report we want to alert and suggest, that if the patient has a
diagnosis of Erdheim-Chester disease and a thyroid nodule, that lesion should be
biopsied, even if it’s clinical aspect is not suspicious.
With this case we concluded that if the papillary carcinoma cells are positive to
the BRAF V600E, it doesn’t mean that the Erdheim-Chester histiocytes are
positive  to  this  mutation.  Although  it’s  the  same  mutation,  if  a  papillary
carcinoma is present, the mutation shouldn’t be searched on papillary cells and
the introduction of the new armamentarium should be based on mutation in the
histiocytes cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP334
EP335
Orbitopathy as a manifestation of Immunoglobulin-G4-related disease
- case report
Agnieszka Zwolak1,2, Marta Dudzinska1, Joanna S´ wirska1,2,
Joanna Malicka2, Jadwiga Daniluk1 & Jerzy S Tarach2
1Chair of Internal Medicine and Department of Internal Medicine in
Nursing, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland;2Department of
Endocrinology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
Introduction
Immunoglobulin-G4-related disease (IgG4RD) is a multidisciplinary problem
due to plasmatic cells infiltration and areas of fibrosis in the affected tissues. In
IgG4RD, elevation of serum IgG4 immunoglobulins is present. Clinically, the
disease  is  mainly  manifested  as:  autoimmune  pancreatitis,  salivary  gland
involvement, sclerosing cholangitis, lymphadenopathy, lachrymal gland enlarge-
ment,  retroperitoneal  fibrosis  or  orbital  pseudotumor.  The  simultaneous
involvement of multiple organs is common. Treatment is based on glucocorti-
coids in case of recurrence or resistance to steroids, immunosuppresive therapy,
involving disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs or rituximab are used.
Material and methods
The aim of the study was to present a case of a patient with orbitopathy in whom
in the course of diagnostic procedure, IgG4-related ophthalmic disease was
detected.
Results
A 68-year old man, without past history of any chronic diseases, was admitted to
the outpatient endocrinology clinic because of increased protrusion of both
eyeballs with swallowing conjunctivitis, eyelids redness and retro orbital pain.
The MRI scans revealed enlargement and swallowing of all periorbital muscles.
The thyroid function was normal with negative all anthythyroid immunoglobulins
thus excluding Graves orbitopathy. Since elevated serum total IgG and IgG4 was
stated,  systemic  glicocorticosteroid  therapy  followed  by  oral  prednisolone
treatment was introduced. The evident regression of symptoms and protrusion
of eyeballs was achieved. The above therapy was repeated one year later because
of recurrence of symptoms. Yet, at that moment it was followed by methotrexate
treatment (20 mg/week). Until now, 5 months after second glucocorticoids pulse,
the  patient  does  not  present  any  symptoms  of  orbitopathy;  well  tolerated
metotrexate therapy is continued.
Conclusion
Presented  case  highlights  the  importance  of  considering  IgG4RD  in  the
differential diagnosis of orbitopathy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP335
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP336
Mixed gonadal dygenesia report of a mosaicism 45,X/46,XY, mexican
case report
Nory Omayra Davalos Rodríguez1,3, José Antonio Escalante Pulido2,
José de Jesús Magallanes-Ordon˜ez4, Celia Andrea Ramírez-Aréchiga5,
Enrique Cervantes-Pérez5, Martha Alice Delgadillo Ruano9, Julio
Cesar Gómez10, Ingrid Patricia Dávalos Rodríguez1,11, Luis Eduardo
Figueroa Villanueva11, Sergio Alberto Ramírez-García6, Melva
Gutiérrez Angulo1,7, María de la Luz Ayala Madrigal1 & Ana Rosa
Rincón Sánchez8
1Instituto de Genética Humana Dr. Enrique Corona, Doctorado de Genética
Humana, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico;
2Servicio de Endocrinología Pediatrica, Hospital General Regional No. 46
IMSS, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico;3Hospital Regional Dr. Valentín
Gómez Farías, ISSSTE, Genética, Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico;4Hospital
Regional Dr. Valentín Gómez Farías, ISSSTE, Cirugía Plástica y
Reconstructiva, Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico;5Departamento de Bienestar y
Desarrollo Sustentable Centro Universitario del Norte U de G, Colotlán,
Jalisco, Mexico;6Universidad de la Sierra Sur, Miahuatlán de Porfirio Díaz,
Oaxaca, Mexico;7Centro Universitario de los Altos, Universidad de
Guadalajara, Tepatitlán de Morelos, Jalisco, Mexico;8Doctorado de
Farmacología, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Jalisco,
Mexico;9Centro Médico Nacional de Occidente, IMSS, Endocrinología,
Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico;10Centro Médico Nacional de Occidente,
IMSS, Urología, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico;11Centro Médico Nacional
de Occidente, IMSS, Genética, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.
Introduction
The Disorders of Sex Development (DSDs) may arise from various genetic
disorders  therefore  cytogenetic  studies  are  necessary  to  determine  the
chromosomal sex. The 45,X/46,XY karyotype is considered a mixed gonadal
dysgenesis (MGD) and the mosaicism in this condition has a low incidence: 1.5
per 10 000 newborns, characterized by a broad phenotypic spectrum.
Objective
The aim of this report is to present a mexican newborn female patient with a
phenotype of ambiguous genitalia and a mos 45,X/46XY karyotype. Product of the
IV pregnancy, of non-consanguineous parents. Mother of 39 years and father of 42.
They refer threatened abortion during the first trimester. Born at 37 weeks of
gestation, normal delivery. At birth: weight 3500 gr, height 53 cm. Physical
examination: dolichocephalism, low posterior implanted hair, narrow forhead,
sparse eyebrows, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds; depressed nasal bridge, long
philtrum, wide mouth, high arched palate; posteriorly rotated ears, narrow chest;
genital shown micropenis, right and left hypoplasic gonads. Histopathological
studies: right gonad
1.7!0.8 cm with histological evidence of testicular
dysgenesis; left gonad 7!5 mm with histological data of testicular dysgenesis
with  fibrous  band.  Both  were  compatible  with  mixed  gonadal  dysgenesis.
Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed a karyotype with
mos 45,X[63]/47,XY[7] with a 400 bands resolution level according to ISCN 2013.
Discussion
There are few Latin American cases reported in the literature with Mixed Gonadal
Dysgenesis and a mos 45,X/46,XY karyotype. Cases of newborns with genital
ambiguity occur most frequently in mosaicism 45,X/46,XY and this proportion
should be correlated with the phenotype. Clinical features were recently reported
in this  patients including peculiar  fascies, renal, cardiac  and  neurologic
anomalies.
Conclussion
The  Mixed  Gonadal  Dysgenesis includes  congenital anomalies  including
citogenetic, gonadal and genital alterations. The mosaicism is rare and in this
case all the results correspond to those reported in other literature. These cases
require  complete  clinical  examination,  cytogenetic  and  histopathological
findings, and the performance of new diagnostic methods such as screening of
microdeletions in sexual chromosomes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP336
EP337
Management dilemma in papillary carcinoma arising from struma
ovarii
Ana Hreniuc1, Simona Gherasim1, Cristina Preda1,2,
Maria-Christina Ungureanu1,2, Carmen Vulpoi1,2, Voichita Mogos1,2,
Doina Piciu4, Radu Danila3,2 & Letitia Leustean1,2
1Department of Endocrinology, St. Spiridon Hospital, Iasi, Romania;
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Gr. T. Popa, Iasi, Romania;
3Department of Surgery, St. Spiridon Hospital, Iasi, Romania;4Department
of Radiotherapy, Oncological Institute” Prof. Dr Ion Chiricuta”,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
A rare ovarian teratoma consisting mainly of thyroid tissue, Struma ovarii
accounts for up to 3% of all ovarian tumors. The thyroid tissue may demonstrate
the same spectrum of pathological features as in the normal thyroid including
benign and malignant changes.
A 46-year-old woman was referred to our clinic in July 2015 by the oncologist,
with the diagnosis of struma ovarii with carcinomatous transformation (follicular
variant of papillary carcinoma).
The patient known with morbid obesity, candidate for gastric sleeve surgery, had
been followed up for about one year for a right ovarian cyst of 44/34 mm revealed
at the preoperative echography. Further follow-up IRM examination showed
an increased cyst volume-79/66/72 mm and her CA 125 was slightly elevated
at 85 U/ml (0-35 U/ml). At that time, she was euthyroid: TSHZ1.21 uIU/ul,
fT4Z0.94 ng/dl and her anamnesis revealed no sign of hyperthyroidism.
Suspecting  a  neoplasia,  she  underwent exploratory  laparotomy and  total
abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salphingo-oophorectomy On histopathol-
ogy examination, the large ovarian mass was a Struma ovarii with malignant
papillary architecture and thyroid follicles. On immunohistochemistry, the tumor
cells were positive for TTF1.
Subsequently, the patient underwent prophylactic total thyroidectomy followed
by the administration of 90 mCi of 131I therapy. The WBS examination showed
small uptake in the area of the right ovary. The Tg values were in normal range-
0.04 ng/ml (!0.04 ng/ml) under the administration of a suppressive dose of
L-thyroxine. A pelvic IRM investigation was asked to complete our investigation
and a close follow-up will establish the management in this rare disease.
Case particularities
Being this fairly uncommon tumor there is a lack of diagnostic and treatment
guidelines. The management of the struma ovarii like any other thyroid cancer
permitted us the attentive follow up of eventual secondary disseminations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP337
EP338
Diabetes mellitus and ataxia with anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase
antibodies
Diana Oliveira1, Rui Araújo2, Carolina Moreno1, Dírcea Rodrigues1,
Daniela Guelho1, Nuno Vicente1, Luís Cardoso1, Diana Martins1,
Adriana Lages1, Mara Ventura1, Sandra Paiva1 & Francisco Carrilho1
1Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department, Coimbra University
and Hospital Center, Coimbra, Portugal;2Neurology Department, Coimbra
University and Hospital Center, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65) is expressed by pancreatic beta cells and
also by GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)-secreting neurons. Cerebellar ataxia
associated with anti-GAD65 antibodies (antiGAD Ab) is a rare neurological
disorder that frequently coexists with other autoimmune conditions, namely
Diabetes Mellitus (DM).
Case reports
We describe two cases of ataxia associated with antiGAD Ab. The first case is a
69-year-old obese man with DM known for 5 years, initially medicated with oral
antidiabetic agents and with premature need for insulin therapy, 4 years after
diagnosis, for chronic inadequate metabolic control. At age 65, he developed
dysarthria and ataxic gait and after extensive investigation was diagnosed with
antiGAD Ab ataxia, and underwent treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin.
Levels of antiGAD Ab were 13.3 U/ml (!1.0), ICA (Islet-cell cytoplasmic
antibodies) and anti-insulin Ab negative, anti-IA2 Ab (insulinoma 2-associated)
1.30 U/ml  (!1),  C-peptide
6.7 ng/ml
(1.0-7.6).  The  glycemic  control  was
improved after intensification of insulin therapy. The second case is a 68-year-old
woman, paraplegic after vertebromedullary traumatism, with DM since she was
60. The metabolic control was difficult with oral antidiabetic medication for
5 years, so insulin was added in 2012, but she mantained significant glycemic
lability. In 2015 she was diagnosed with antiGAD Ab ataxia after presenting with
progressive positional vertigo, dysarthria and diplopia. AntiGAD Ab 239.07 U/ml
(!1.0), ICA (Islet-cell cytoplasmic antibodies) positive, anti-insulin Ab negative.
Considering the analytical results and glycemic lability, oral antidiabetic agents
were suspended and she initiated multiple daily injections of insulin.
Conclusion
The autoimmune etiology of DM can be considered in any age group, especially
when other autoimmune conditions are present. An accurate DM classification
allows therapeutic adjustment and metabolic control optimization. In patients
with DM and positive autoimmunity, with neurologic disorders not explained by
diabetic neuropathy and after exclusion of other causes, ataxia associated with
antiGAD Ab can be considered.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP338
EP339
A rare case of sex reversal during puberty
Gesine Meyer1, Michael Sohn2, Klaus Badenhoop1 & Jorg Bojunga1
1Department of Internal Medicine 1, Endocrinology, Goethe-University
Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany;2Department of Urology, Markus
Krankenhaus, Frankfurt, Germany.
A 34-year-old refugee from Somalia was referred because of a suspected DSD.
Due to ambiguous, but predominantly female external genitalia at birth he was
raised as a girl, whereas his subjective gender identity has always been male.
Puberty led to a significant virilization of the body but only to a very limited
virilization of the external genitalia. The patient presented himself with an
undoubtedly  male-type  body  composition.  External  genitalia  were  now
predominantly  male  with  micropenis  and  hypospadia  glandis.  Small  testes
could be palpated in both labia between which a small perineal orifice appeared.
Sex hormones LH, FSH, testosterone (T), dihydrotestosterone (DHT) DHEAS
and  androstenedione  lay  within  normal  male  ranges.  Estradiol  level  was
borderline  elevated
(54 pg/ml,  n
27.1-52.2),  whereas  Mullerian  inhibiting
hormone  was  remarkably  increased
(35.48 ng/ml,  n
1.5-4.3).  Chromosome
analysis showed a regular male karyotype. Highly increased T/DHT-ratio of 54
(n
8-16) in combination with the masculinization defect strictly limited to
external genitalia led to the clinical diagnosis of steroid 5 alpha-reductase 2
deficiency (SRD).
SRD is an autosomal recessive, 46, XY DSD leading to an impaired virilization
during embryogenesis due to defective conversion of T to DHT. In affected
subjects, 5-alpha-reductase activity is reduced in genital skin fibroblasts. Clinical
presentation is highly variable from almost entirely female to almost entirely male
external genitalia. Pubertal increase in T can be sufficient for virilization of
the remainder body at the time of expected puberty as seen in our patient.
Consanguinity of patient’s parents suggests a homozygous mutation in the
SRD5A2 gene and a molecular genetic analysis is ongoing in order to identify the
mutation. Over 50 different mutations have been described in the past.
Conclusions
This case of a rare DSD elucidates impressively how an enzyme deficiency affects
the mechanisms of androgen action in the process of sexual differentiation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP339
EP340
Unknown cause of non-PTH mediated hypercalcemia in Pregnancy
Raju Panta, Antoine Makdissi, Manav Batra & Ajay Chaudhuri
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.
Introduction
Calcium metabolism during pregnancy changes significantly but ionized calcium
level remains normal. During pregnancy, there is two-fold increase in intestinal
calcium  absorption  mediated  by  increase  in
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin  D.
Hypercalcemia in pregnancy is uncommon and most reported cases are primary
hyperparathyroidism.
Case report
A 18-year-old 10 weeks’ pregnant African American female presented to hospital
with epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting for 2 days. She was not taking any calcium
supplements. She had mild epigastric tenderness.
Lab showed hypercalcemia with corrected calcium of 13.1 mg/dl (normal 9-10.8)
and ionized calcium of 6.7 mg/dl (normal 4.7-5.3). PTH was undetectable.
PTHrP, thyroid function test, serum immunoelectrophoresis, vitamin A, ACE
were normal. 25-hydroxyvitamin D was low, 9 (normal 30-100 ng/ml) and 1,25-
dihydroxyvitamin D was inappropriately normal 51 (Normal 19.9-79.3 pg/ml).
Her 24-hour urinary calcium was 436.8 mg (normal 50-150). MRI of neck, chest,
abdomen, pelvis showed a 1.4 cm sized lymph node in right hilar region. Foetal
ultrasound revealed singleton pregnancy, clubbed left foot. Due to persistent
hypercalcemia, she had PICC placed and discharged with iv hydration.
Lab from first pregnancy (medically terminated) two years ago showed corrected
calcium of 13.5. Her calcium in between these pregnancies was 9.9. With
intravenous hydration at home, her ionized calcium was between 5.5 and 6.9.
Conclusion
Our  case  represents  a  unique  case  of  non-PTH  mediated  hypercalcemia.
Extensive work up did not reveal any definite aetiology. Another consideration
is CYP24A1 gene mutation. As CYP24A1 metabolizes 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
and 25-hydroxyvitamin D, patients have high levels of both and kidney stones.
Our patient did not have high levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D and no renal stones.
Normally, PTHrP level steadily rises throughout the pregnancy. Our patient had
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
normal levels of PTHrP. A normal calcium level in between pregnancies suggest
that this hypercalcemia is related to pregnancy. Hence, we suspect there is/are
unknown calcium regulators.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP340
EP341
Multiple endocrine disorders in Werner syndrome
Ekaterina Sorkina1,2, Tatiana Grebennikova1, Janna Belaia1,
Ludmila Rozhinskaia1, Ekaterina Koksharova1,3, Alexandr Mayorov1,3,
Gagik Galstyan1, Marina Shestakova1,3, Galina Melnichenko1,2 &
Anatoly Tiulpakov1,3
1Endocrinology Research Center, Moscow, Russia;2I.M. Sechenov First
Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia;3Lomonosov Moscow
State University, Moscow, Russia.
Background
Werner syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disease caused by a mutation of
the DNA helicase gene (WRN), characterized by the premature onset of multiple
age-related disorders.
Objective
To describe unusual multiple endocrine and metabolic disorders in three unrelated
clinical cases of Werner syndrome.
Methods
Three patients with obvious clinical features of premature ageing were referred to
an endocrinologist due to endocrine disorders. Mutations of the WRN gene were
found using a custom Ion Ampliseq panel and PGM semiconductor sequencer
(Ion Torrent).
Results
All patients had short stature, grey hair since youth, a beaked nose, BMI
deficiency and lipoatrophy, two of them had had their lenses replaced. Patient 1,
41 years, was referred to an endocrinologist due to uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
type 2 (DM2) with marked insulin resistance (200 U insulin daily) and late-onset
complications (microalbuminuria, polyneuropathy, trophic foot ulcers), marked
hypertryglyceridemia  and  arteriosclerosis,  recurrent  acute  pancreatitis  and
follicular adenoma of the thyroid gland. In Patient 1 homozygous mutation
c.3957dupT p.I1320YfsX12 was found. Patient 2, 35 year, was referred to an
endocrinologist due to hyperparathyroidism, which was secondary to Werner
syndrome as no parathyroid tumour was found and vitamin D levels were normal.
He had milder DM2 and dyslipidemia, foot ulcers, primary hypothyroidism and
osteoporosis. Patient 2 - heterozygous mutation c.1165del. p.R389EfsX4. Patient
3, 43 year, was referred to an endocrinologist due to severe osteoporosis and
hypogonadism, and he also had mild DM2. In Patient 3 heterozygous transition
p.L687V (registered as a rare polymorphism rs185468906) was found.
Conclusion
Patients  with  Werner  syndrome  develop  multiple  endocrine  and  metabolic
disorders, which may vary, possibly due to different genetic backgrounds, but this
should be recognised and diagnosed by endocrinologists as soon as possible
in order to provide patients with required symptomatic therapy and proper
follow-up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP341
EP342
A young woman with a giant cystic parathyroid adenoma presenting
with myelofibrosis
Feyzi Gokosmanoglu1, Aysegul Atmaca1 & Bekir Kuru2
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, School of Medicine, Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun,
Turkey;2Department of General Surgery, School of Medicine, Ondokuz
Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey.
Introduction
Parathyroid adenomas are rarely large in size. Here, we present a giant cystic
parathyroid adenoma presented with pancytopenia.
Case report
Twenty two years old female presented with fatigue, bone pain, polyuria, a lump
in the neck and pancytopenia. She had a pulsatile mass on the right side of the
neck which compressed her trachea. She was evaluated by Hematology since her
Hb was 4.7 g/dl, WBC was 2200 u/l platelet count was: 69 000 u/l. Bone marrow
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
biopsy revealed myelofibrosis. During her evaluation, she was found to have
a brown tumor on her right mandible with Ca: 12 mg/dl (8.6-10), P: 2.2 mg/dl
(2.3-4.7), ALP: 135 U/l (35-104), PTH: 327 pg/ml (15-65), 25(OH)D: 6.8 ng/ml
(30-80) and 24-h urine Ca: 320 mg/day. She was referred to Endocrinology. Her
bone survey revealed diffuse osteoporosis, and brown tumor of right mandible.
T scores obtained by DXA were: Lumber vertebra: K4.3 Femur neck: K3.4
Distal radius: K5.6. Glomerular filtration rate was calculated as 72 ml/min. She
had no history of renal stones and renal ultrasonography reveled no stones. Her
parathyroid ultrasonography and scintigraphy confirmed the presence of giant
parathyroid adenoma 8!8!14 cm in dimensions, extending into the mediasti-
num. She received iron and vitamin D for three months followed by adenoma
excision. Her surgery was unique among other surgeries performed to patients
with giant adneomas since it was only performed by a servical incision without
the need for thoracotomy. After the excision, intraoperative PTH level was
measured as 87 pg/ml. Three months after the operation her Ca, P, ALP and PTH
levels and her blood count were normal.
Conclusions
Animal and human studies suggest a myelofibrotic role for high PTH levels.
However, very few patients present with pancytopenia due to myelofibrosis. This
patient with chronic primary hyperparathyroidism presented with myelofibrosis
that resolved after paratahyroidectomy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP342
EP343
Parathyromatosis following endoscopic parathyroid surgery: a rare
case report
Ajay Aggarwal1, Vivek Aggarwal1, Roopak Wadhwa1 & Rajeev Khanna2
1Fortis Hospital, Shalimar Bagh, New Delhi, India;2Dr Khanna’s Clinic,
Amritsar, Punjab, India.
Parathyromatosis, a rare cause of recurrent hyperparathyroidism, consists of
ectopic hyper-functioning parathyroid tissues scattered throughout neck. Two
forms of parathyromatosis have been reported, type-1 due to hyperplasia of
parathyroid rests from embryologic development and type-2
occurs  due to
spillage, seeding of parathyroid tissue during parathyroid surgery. Repeated
surgery often is necessary. Preoperative diagnosis is rarely made, may be due to
lack of awareness of entity.
We present a case of recurrent hyperparathyroidism occurring 2-years after
parathyroid surgery in a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism. We attribute
this to spillage of tumour cells during previous endoscopic parathyroidectomy.
A 55-years old male presented with bony pains and nausea for 1 year. He had
focused  left  superior  endoscopic  parathyroidectomy  done
2-years  back  for
adenoma. Physical examination was unremarkable. The laboratory results showed
elevated serum calcium 3.5 mmol/l, PTH 1400 ng/l and 24-h urinary calcium,
suggestive of recurrent hyperparathyroidism. Ultrasonography, MIBI and PET
scans failed to localise lesion. Possibilities of incomplete removal, hyperplasia,
multiple/ectopic adenoma, malignancy and parathyromatosis were considered.
On exploration, multiple nodules (!5 mm) were found in the left side neck
compartment embedded in strap muscles, sternocliedomastoid, thyroid surface
and left central compartment. Opposite parathyroid glands were normal. The
surgical  procedure  included  left  hemi-thyroidectomy,  removal  of  ipsilateral
straps, parts of sternocleidomastoid, berry picking of superficial nodules and
clearance of tissue close to entry of ports. Post-op laboratory results showed
serum  calcium
2.4 mmol/l  and  undetectable  PTH  levels
(!2.5 ng/l). The
histopathology findings indicated parathyromatosis. Serum calcium is normal
on 1-year follow up. This is first case report to show parathyromatosis occurring
following endoscopic surgery for benign parathyroid adenoma. So, Utmost care
should be taken to avoid parathyroid spillage during surgery and make every
effort to not rupture parathyroid capsule, even of benign tumour of the gland.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP343
EP344
Type 1 diabetes mellitus and acquired hemophilia
Carlos Tavares Bello, Ricardo Fonseca, Catarina Barreiros,
Joa˜o Sequeira Duarte, José Esteves & Carlos Vasconcelos
Hospital de Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction
Type 1a Diabetes (DM1) is a challenging disease with a rising incidence (up to
40 per 100 000 in Finland and Sardinia) being less common in the African
population. It is believed to have an autoimmune basis and has been associated
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
with other  autoimmune  diseases namely autoimmune  thyroiditis and celiac
disease. Acquired hemophilia is a rare clinical entity characterized by bleeding
diathesis induced by circulating inhibitors to coagulation factors (VIII ou IX) that
compromise hemostasis. The authors describe a case of a patient with DM1 with
concomitant acquired hemophilia.
Case report
A 23 year old female patient with previous hospitalization for severe urinary tract
infection  and  no  regular  medication,  allergies  or  previous  pregnancy  or
transfusions was admitted to the Hospital for Diabetic Ketoacidosis. Autoanti-
bodies (Anti-insulin, islet cell and Glutamate decarboxylase) were positive and a
favorable glycemic response was obtained with an intensive insulin regimen.
On the 3rd day of hospital admission the patient presented with severe hematuria.
There was no significant hemoglobin fall but activated plasma thromboplastin
time was prolonged (120 seconds). No changes in prothrombin time or platelets
were found. Mixing clotting studies showed a failure to correct aPTT and Factor
VIII activity was reduced (!0.5% - Normal Range 50-150%). Inhibitors to
FVIII  were  detected
(2.68
Bethesda  Units).  Full  autoimmune  panel  and
Rheumatology consult were inconclusive. Due to treatment failure of Cyclopho-
sphamide  and  corticosteroids  the  patient  was  treated  with  Rituximab  with
improvement of both the hemophilia and DM1.
Conclusion
In this case no secondary cause of the hemophilia was found, being DM1 the only
autoimmune comorbidity possibly contributing to the onset of hemorrhage. Only
a few cases of acquired hemophilia have so far been described to affect DM1
patients. Interestingly Rituximab improved both conditions being the patient
currently hemorrhage free despite still requiring insulin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP344
EP345
Intravenous omega 3 treatment in a pregnant patient with acute
pancreatitis and lipoprotein lipase deficiency
Inmaculada Gonzalez-Molero, Victoria Contreras Bolivar, Monserrat
Gonzalo MArin, Gabriel Olveira, Marta Domínguez & Francisco Tinahones
Malaga Regional Universitary Hospital, Málaga, Spain.
Introduction
Acute pancreatitis induced by hypertriglyceridemia is a severe condition and its
management is complicated.
Case report
We present a case of severe acute pancreatitis induced by hypertriglyceridemia
secondary to lipoprotein lipase -LPL- deficiency (188 Gly-Glu mutation, LPL
undetectable activity) in a pregnant patient with gestational diabetes.
The  patient was  sent  to our  Lipid Unit  in the
13th  gestation’  week.  The
triglyceride levels were 5337 mg/dl at the beginning. Our patient was initially
managed with diet (very low fat diet and low carbohydrates because of gestational
diabetes) and omega-3 supplements but it was necessary to carry out artificial
nutricional support: total parenteral nutrition (TPN) because she presented acute
pancreatitis secondary to hypertriglyceridemia. We used a omega 3 enriched
TPN. Meanwhile the patient was supported with TPN the triglycerides levels were
537 mg/dl (the lowest level in her medical history). She had a healthy female
baby.
Conclusions
LPL  deficiency  might  cause  severe  hypertriglyceridemia,  repetition  acute
pancreatitis which is an unwieldy and severe situation during pregnancy. Acute
familial hypertriglyceridemia pancreatitis accounts for 5% of cases, including
LPL deficiency.
The goal of treatment is to reach triglycerides levels below 500 mg/dl, being very
low fat diet the treatment of choice, drugs or plasmapheresis techniques can also
be associated. Clinical guidelines do not recommend to supplement with lipids de
TPN composition in pancreatitis induced by hipertrygliceridemia, but we decided
to use w3 fatty acids (20% of total kilocalories were fats) in the parenteral
nutrition because it is a source of essential fatty acids and because of its
hypolipemiant  and  inmunomodulatory  effect.  With  this  treatment,  patient
achieved the lowest triglyceride levels in her life. So we could say that TPN
enriched in w3 fatty acids and glutamine was safe and effective in our patient with
significant decrease in triglyceride levels. This is the first case in the literature that
describe this evolution in a patient with hypertriglyceridemia induced severe
pancreatitis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP345
EP346
Stiff-person syndrome and type 1 diabetes mellitus
Antonio F Oliveira Filho1, Rossana C Almeida1, Eveline M C Brito2 &
Adriana B Nunes3
1Health Service Pombal/Campina Grande, Paraiba PB, Brazil;2Federal
University Pernambuco, Recife, PE, Brazil;3Federal University Rio Grande
Norte, Natal, RN, Brazil.
Stiff person syndrome (SPS) is a rare disease characterized by progressive muscle
rigidity and spasms, which can lead to functional disability. This condition can be
challenging to diagnose if there is no high index of suspicion. Its etiology is
unknown, but one of the most likely causes is autoimmune aggression, which is
corroborated by that fact that it is associated with other autoimmune diseases in
half of the cases described in literature.
We will present here the case of a boy in which SPS is associated to type I
diabetes mellitus.
The 15-year-old patient was diagnosed with type I diabetes 5 years ago, when
he  presented  with  altered  level  of  consciousness  and  capillary  glucose  of
32.22 mmol/l. Three years ago he started presenting with episodes of muscle
stiffness and spasms, triggered by touch and lying down position, which led him
to  sleep  sitting  on  a  chair.  After  thorough  investigation,  including  a
electroneuromyography  exam  showing  continuous  motor  stimulation  and
immunological testes indicating high levels of anti-GAD antibodies (50 IU/ml),
SPS became the main diagnostic hypothesis.
The patient has been currently using Clonazepam, with overall improvement of
the symptoms. He also uses NPH and regular insulin for the diabetes, and does not
suffer from any chronic complications.
The presence of type I diabetes on this patient, who already suffered from a
neuromuscular disease of unknown etiology, brought to light the hypothesis of
SPS, later confirmed by laboratory exams. This allowed appropriate treatment in
time. Therefore, this case illustrates the importance of having a broader view in
clinical practice, taking co morbidities into consideration in order to reach the
correct diagnosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP346
EP347
A case of complicated course of type 1 diabetes mellitus due to Graves’
Disease manifestation
Nadzeya Peskavaya1, Anzhalika Solntsava1, Olga Kniazkina2 &
Natallya Kizevich2
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;22nd City Children’s
Hospital, Minsk, Belarus.
Introduction
The prevalence of autoimmune thyroid diseases in patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM) is high. Thyroid hormones have a pronounced effect on the
regulation of glucose homeostasis. We report patient with well controlled T1DM
and good compliance, presented with severe diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) due to
thyrotoxicosis.
Case report
A 15-year-old girl with well-controlled T1DM for 5 years (HbA1c!8%) had no
tissue complications of diabetes and episodes of DKA. The daily dose of insulin
was 0.7 units/kg. She presented to the emergency room feeling unwell with severe
weakness, nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting and polyuria. She was dehydrated
and shocked with blood pressure 120/50 mmHg and heart rate 160 beats/min,
temperature was 37.38C. She had heavy glycosuria and ketonuria, capillary blood
glucose 18.6 mmol/l, HbA1 14.5%, arterial blood pH 6.8, bicarbonate 3.9 mmol/l.
Full blood count, liver and renal function, chest X-ray, and electrocardiogram
were all normal. Admission diagnosis of DKA was confirmed and patient was
started on intravenous fluids and insulin infusion. Patient show improvement,
blood sugar levels decrease, bicarbonate also improved. However, tachycardia
and expressed weakness remained, fine tremor and goiter (volume of thyroid
gland 28 ml) were noted. The thyroid function test showed TSH of 0.057 mU/l
(norm 0.25-5 mU\l), fT4  of 44 pmol/l (norm 12-23) and the TSH receptor
antibodies were high (17.8 U\l) confirming the diagnosis of Graves’ disease.
Tiamazole 30 mg orally with betablockers was started. The daily dose of insulin
increased to 1.1 units/kg. The girl responded well to treatment with normalization
of the overall health and positive dynamics at laboratory inspection and went
home after 14 days.
Conclusion
All patients with T1DM must periodically assess thyroid function. In patients with
unexplained DKA is necessary to investigate the levels of thyroid hormones.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP347
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP348
A rare case of dermoid cyst of the neck - clinical presentation and
surgical treatment
Nada Santrac1, Merima Goran1, Ivan Markovic1,2, Marko Buta1,2,
Igor Djurisic1, Silvana Lukic3 & Radan Dzodic1,2
1Institute for Oncology and Radiology of Serbia, Surgical Oncology Clinic,
Belgrade, Serbia;2Medical School, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,
Serbia;3Department of Pathology, Institute for Oncology and Radiology of
Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
Dermoid cysts are usually presented as solitary hamartomatous tumor, containing
all skin adnexa. They can be found in the skin and subcutis of the face and neck; or
can be intracranial, intraspinal, or intra-abdominal, localized in the ovary or
omentum. Cutaneous cysts most commonly appear on the forehead, around eyes,
as well as on the floor of the mouth, rarely on the neck.
Case report
We present a 24-year-old female patient with a dermoid cyst in the jugulum that
was operated in our Institution. Patient initially noticed painless tumor mass lower
on the neck. Physical and ultrasonical examination showed well-marginated,
semi-solid, semi-cystic tumor mass in the jugulum, approximately 50 mm in size,
localized anteriorly to infrahyoid muscles and trachea, with no connection to
thyroid gland. Patient was asymptomatic. No fine-needle aspiration biopsy was
done. After adequate preparation, patient was operated in general anaesthesia.
Through minimal skin incision on the anterior of the neck, just above the tumor
mass, the cystic lesion was completely removed from the front of trachea and
infrahyoid muscles, with the intact wall. Frozen section histopathology analysis
showed dermoid cyst. On definite histopathology these findings were confirmed.
The cyst was 46!42!25 mm (CCxLLxAP) in size, with keratinized stratified
epithelium covering the cyst wall, and sebaceous and sweat glands, as well as hair
follicles and hair within. Patient was released from hospital on first postoperative
day, with full recovery.
Conclusions
Dermoid cysts of the neck are rare and can often be misdiagnosed with thyroid
tumors. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging are helpful in making the
correct differential diagnosis. Surgery is the treatment of choice, especially due to
possible malignant alteration. However, surgical manipulation has to be delicate,
since cyst content, especially if with bacterial infection, may spread into the
surrounding tissues and cause severe complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP348
EP349
High testosterone causing virilisation from a right polycystic ovary
Emily Tafadzwa Mudenha1,2, Buddhike Mendis1,2, Francesca Meakin2 &
Nawal Ibraheem1
1Sherwood Forest Hospitals, Sutton in Ashfield, Nottinghamshire, UK;
2Nottingham University Hospitals, Queens Medical Centre,
Nottingham, UK.
Introduction
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a common cause of hyperandrogenism in
women of reproductive age but rarely causes very high testosterone levels and
frank virilisation which is associated with ovarian or adrenal tumours. We present
a rare case of progressively increasing testosterone levels causing virilisation
from a histologically confirmed right polycystic ovary. Complete cure was
achieved by right salpingo-oophrectomy.
Case
A 32 year old lady diagnosed with PCOS four years previously, presented with
worsening extensive hair growth forcing her to shave daily, receding thinning hair
line, deepened voice with male stature and amenorrhoea of 8 years duration
despite Metformin and spironolactone therapy and weight loss. On examination
she had a BMI of 36, and Ferriman-Gallwey score of 30 with evidence of
virilisation. Testosterone was 12 nmol/l (0 - 2.8) from 5.6 nmol/l at the time of
diagnosis of PCOS with marginally raised androstenedione level 13.5 nmol/l (up
to 12.9). LH, FSH, oestradiol, DHEAS, 17-hydroxyprogesterone and CA125
levels as well as MRI adrenals were all normal. She was under surveillance for a
3!4 cm  right  dermoid  cyst  and  she  then  underwent  a  right  salpingo-
oophrectomy. Histology showed ovarian follicular cysts and no malignancy.
Testosterone levels 3 days and 6 weeks postoperatively were !0.6 and 1.4 nmol/l
respectively and she continues to notice marked improvement in her symptoms.
Discussion
PCOS,  the  commonest  cause  of  ovarian  hyperandrogenism  has  moderately
elevated testosterone levels. The presence of virilization is rare in PCOS and
warrants consideration of solid ovarian malignancies such as teratomas. The
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
unusual features of this case were; firstly the degree of virilisation was greater
than expected for PCOS raising suspicion of an underlying ovarian malignancy
which was the presumed dermoid cyst. Secondly, the slowly progressive nature of
her symptoms leading up to virilisation is unusual. Lastly her imaging was of a
unilateral cystic ovary not bilateral.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP349
EP350
Improvement in acute intermittent porphyria symptoms after bilateral
oophorectomy: a case report
Jekaterina Nagaiceva1,2, Natalija Kaplja1,2, Ilze Puzaka1,2, Liva Steina3,
Natalija Fokina1, Maija Kokare1, Sandra Steina1, Edvins Miklasevics3 &
Valdis Pirags1,2
1Pauls Stradins University Hospital, Riga, Latvia;2University of Latvia,
Riga, Latvia;3Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
Acute  intermittent  porphyria
(AIP)  is  an  uncommon  monogenic  autosomal
dominant disorder with a defect in the haem biosynthesis pathway at the level of
the enzyme porphobilinogen deaminase. The disease has low penetrance; most
patients could stay asymptomatic throughout life. Clinical manifestation depends
on various precipitants, which increase hepatic haem production and cytochrome
activity. We report a case of a female patient who had regular moderate-to-severe
cyclic AIP attacks, which started usually during the premenstrual period and
ended after the menstruation. During the attacks she was treated with intravenous
dextrose load, gabapentin, tramadol and intravenous hemin, which could not be
used regularly due to high costs. Combined oral contraceptive drug therapy was
unsuccessful. Gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist treatment was impossible
since it was too expensive for the patient. Chronic complications progressed,
including sensory, motor and autonomic neuropathy and chronic kidney disease.
After the last severe AIP attack, a laparoscopic bilateral oophorectomy was
performed.  The  surgery  was  successful  with  an  uneventful  postoperative
recovery. Four years have passed, during this time AIP attacks have become
milder and infrequent with one attack-free year during the last two years. The
improvement in patient’s quality of life is evident. Endogenous sex steroid
hormones, mostly progesterone, play an important role in precipitating AIP
attacks in women. Our case shows that the choice of therapy needs to be made
individually for each patient. During the last forty years, only a few similar cases
have been reported.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP350
EP351
Saint John’s wort not so saint
Claudia Arnas Leon1, Ana Delia Santana Suarez1, Sara Quintana Arroyo1,
Carmen Acosta Calero1 & Francisco Javier Martinez Martin2
1Hospital Doctor Negrin, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain;2Clinica San
Roque, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
Introduction
In addition to the medication prescribed by their doctors, patients may recourse to
natural  medicine  and take  herbal  medications  without  thinking  about  their
potential side effects and interactions with other drugs.
Case Report
A 39-year-old female, with personal history of iron deficiency anemia, regular
menses but long-standing dysmenorrhea and polymenorrhea and reactive anxiety-
depressive disorder, complained of frequent intermenstrual spotting during the
last four months. She had also increased emotional lability with several episodes
of tremor, chills, sweating, nausea and vomiting. The patient was taking sertraline
and oral contraceptive. She was initially diagnosed with anxiety crisis. Except for
anxious mood and central obesity (BMI 31.2 kg/m2), no pathological signs were
found  on  physical  examination.  Lab  tests  were  normal,  except  for  LH
2.04 mUI/ml, FSH 1.45 mUI/ml and 17-b-estradiol 17 pg/ml. When the patient
was asked about taking any other additional medication, she said that she had
been  taking  a  herbal  antidepressant  for  the  last  four  months.  This  herbal
medication was based on Hypericum perforatum (Saint John’s wort), which is a
potent inducer of cytochrome P450 and P-glycoprotein. Saint John’s wort is
implied in many drug interactions, including with antidepressants of the selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor family and oral contraceptives. Hypericum was
withdrawn and, during the follow-up, the patient did not present new episodes of
breakthrough bleeding or anxiety crisis.
Conclusions
Our patient was finally diagnosed with episodic serotonergic syndrome and
breakthough bleeding due to interactions between Hypericum and sertraline and
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
oral contraceptive. An exhaustive medication lookup should be performed in
every patient in order to find out if they are taking any herbal medication with
potential severe side effects or drug interactions.
What’s new
Self-medication with natural medicines is increasing, so every treatment must be
reviewed, even in case of unreported or alternative drugs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP351
EP352
Echinococcal cyst as rare cause of increased lumbar bone mineral
density
Miro Cokolic, Matej Rakusa & Andrej Zavratnik
Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Internal Clinic, University
Clinical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.
Introduction
An 80-year old  female  with known osteoporosis was reassessed for  BMD
measurement. Her baseline BMD and T-score of lumbar spine (L1-L4) measured
in 2004 were 0.699 g/cm2, K3.5 S.D., T-score of total left hip was 0.618 g/cm2,
K2.7 S.D.. She was treated with alendronate 70 mg, cholecalciferol 7000 IE per
week and calcium supplements.
Case report
At follow-up in 2013, DXA scan, BMD of lumbar spine L1-L4 was 0.910 g/cm2,
T-score  was  K1.2
S.D.  BMD  and  T-scores  for  lumbar  vertebrae:  L1
1.384 g/cm2,C4.2 S.D.; L2 0.667 g/cm2, K3.3 S.D.; L3 0.654 g/cm2, K3.9 S.D.;
L4 0.785 g/cm2, K3.0
S.D. BMD and T-score of neck and total hip were
0.463 g/cm2, K3.5 S.D., and 0.590 g/cm2, K2.9 S.D., respectively. On image
examination, we identified a calcified mass in the projection of the L1 vertebra.
Upon the reanalysis of the DXA scan, we excluded the calcified formation and L1.
BMD of lumbar spine (L2-L4) was 0.701 g/cm2, T-score was K3.4 S.D.. BMD
and T-scores were: L2 0.614 g/cm2, K3.8 S.D.; L3 0.642 g/cm2, K4.0 S.D.; L4
0.785 g/cm2, K3.0 S.D. In 2016, BMD of lumbar spine (L3-L4) was 0.722 g/cm2,
T-score was K3.4 S.D. BMD and T-scores were: L3 0.667 g/cm2, K3.8 S.D.; L4
0.778 g/cm2, K3.1 S.D., and superposition of calcified formation was on L1CL2.
We checked previous examinations: 3 years before she underwent an abdominal
CT, which revealed a 3 cm large calcified Echinococcal cyst (EC). In 2013, a
DXA scan EC was projected on L1, in 2016 on L1CL2 due to the collapsed L1,
developed kyphosis and height reduction.
Conclusion
Artifacts can interfere with BMD measurements. The study showed that bra-wires
and calcium carbonate pills positioned lateral to the spine can modify BMD.
Several  medical  conditions,  such  as  osteophyte  formation,  osteoarthritis,
ankylosing spondylitis, vertebral fractions, and aortic calcifications can also
increase BMD. However, after review of the PubMed literature, to our knowledge
there were no cases of falsely increased BMD of lumbar spine due to calcified EC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP352
EP353
Malignant struma ovarii causing thyrotoxicosis
Elli Anagnostou1, Antonios Polymeris1, Georgios Morfopoulos2,
Alexios Travlos1, Vassiliki Sarantopoulou1 & Eirini Papasryrou2
1Department of Endocrinology, Alexandra General Hospital, Athens,
Greece;2Department of Pathology, Alexandra General Hospital, Athens,
Greece.
Introduction
Struma  ovarii
(SO)  is  a  specialized  monodermal  teratoma  predominantly
composed of mature thyroid tissue (O50%). It accounts for w5% of all ovarian
teratomas. Thyrotoxicosis is seen in about 8% of patients with SO. Most struma
ovarii are benign with only 5-10% being malignant. Malignant SO causing
thyrotoxicosis is very uncommon.
Case presentation
A 64-year-old woman had been diagnosed with thyrotoxicosis 2 years ago. The
thyroid gland is palpable with micronodular texture and the patient is euthyroid
under carbimazole. She presents abdominal pain and progressive enlargement of
the abdomen over a two-month period. An abdominal ultrasonography (U/S)
revealed a pelvic mass and a large fluid collection. Subsequently, Computed
Tomography (CT) of the abdomen and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the
pelvis confirmed the presence of a complex right ovarian mass measuring 13 cm.
The patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-
oopherectomy, omentectomy and appendectomy. Histological examination of
multiple sections from the excised tumor revealed the presence of ‘follicular
thyroid-type carcinoma arising in struma ovarii of the right ovary. Metastatic
infiltration was seen in the tissue fragments submitted from the pouch of Douglas.
The immunohistochemistry analysis showed positivity for TTF1, TH6, HMBE1,
focally positive for NSE and negative for panCK and CK19’.
Anti-thyroid treatment was discontinued one month post-surgery, in light of the
pathology result. During the 4-year follow-up the patient remains euthyroid.
Conclusion
There has been controversy about the management of malignant SO which is a
very rare entity. Even more uncommon is malignant SO causing thyrotoxicosis.
As  clinical  signs  are  non  specific  other  causes  of  thyrotoxicosis  must  be
considered for differential diagnosis. Our case is one of the very few cases ever
reported.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP353
EP354
An unusual case of adult onset multi-systemic Langerhans cell
histiocytosis with perianal and subsequent incident thyroid involvement
Ozen Oz Gul1, Pinar Sisman1, Erdem Gozden2, Soner Cander1, Meral Kurt3,
Ozlem Saraydaroglu4, Turkay Kirdak5, Canan Ersoy1 & Erdinc Erturk1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Uludag University Medical
School, Bursa, Turkey;2Department of Hematology, Uludag University
Medical School, Bursa, Turkey;3Department of Radiation Oncology,
Uludag University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey;4Department of
Pathology, Uludag University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey;5Department
of Surgery, Uludag University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare sporadic disease characterized by
histiocytic neoplastic infiltration of various organ systems and a wide spectrum of
clinical manifestations, ranging from benign and self-limiting to lethal.
Case report
We report a rare case of adult onset multi-systemic LCH in a 36-year-old male
patient with an initial perianal presentation and incidental finding of subsequent
thyroid gland involvement in the follow up period. The patient with history of
perianal LCH treated with surgical excision and local radiotherapy was referred to
our endocrinology department upon detection of hypermetabolic nodular lesions in
the left lateral lobe of thyroid gland on Positron Emission Tomography - Computed
Tomography (PET/CT) scan in the 9th month of follow up. Current evaluation
revealed euthyroid status, a hypoechoic solid lesion of 13!9 mm in size with
irregular borders in the left thyroid lobe on thyroid USG and diagnoses of suspected
oncocytic lesion, Hashimoto thyroiditis or LCH based on cytologic assessment of
thyroid nodule fine needle aspiration of biopsy. The patient underwent total
thyroidectomy and pathological assessment confirmed the diagnosis of Langerhans
cell histiocytosis. Assessments in the 6th month of postoperative follow up
revealed euthyroid status with no thyroid tissue remnants or pathological lymph
node on thyroid USG. In view of the multifocal lesions indicating multi-system
disease, a systemic chemotherapy protocol with combination of prednisone and
vinblastine has been planned by the hematology department.
Conclusion
Our findings underscore the importance of awareness of this rare condition
associated with low index of suspicion among practitioners for LCH as well as the
significance of ensuring proper follow-up in adult onset LCH to rule out systemic
disease. Along with implementing a treatment plan matching the prognostic
stratification of the patient, multidisciplinary approach and long-term close follow
up with PET/CT scan in the management of adult onset LCH seem crucial given
its rarity and varied presentation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP354
EP355
Amiodarone - induced type 2 thyrotoxicosis in patient with ESRD
treated with hemodialysis
Maria Kurowska1, Joanna Malicka1, Ewa Bober-Palak2, Marcin Lewicki1 &
Jerzy S. Tarach1
1Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland;
2B. Braun Avitum Poland Sp. Z.O.O. Dialysis Station, Tomaszow Lubelski,
Poland.
Introduction
Type 2 amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT2), resulting from the release of
thyroid hormones, is a rarer form of side effect of this drug. Treatment of
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
thyrotoxicosis in patients with end stage renal disease (ESRD) is difficult because
hemodialysis alters renal clearance of drugs and iodine, may impact the results of
assessment and treatment and can increase the medical instability of patients.
Aim
The aim was to present the difficulties of AIT2 treatment in a patient with ERDS.
Case report
Forty seven-year-old man treated with hemodialysis four times a week for 3.5
years. Because of recurrent episodes of atrial flutter and fibrillation amiodarone
was applied by 1.5 months. Due to arrhythmias recurrence, evaluation of thyroid
function was performed and thyrotoxicosis was recognized. Amiodarone was
withdrawn  and  thiamazole  and  prednisone  have  been  applied.  After  slight
improvement, the concentrations of thyroid hormones significantly raised with
TRAb-0.4 U/l (n!1.5), a/TPO-86U/l (n!60), a/TG-89U/l (n!60). In ultrasound
thyroid goiter [47 ml] with heterogeneous structure and reduced vascularization
was detected. The lack of 99 mTc uptake in scintigraphy was found. The patient
received thiamazole, prednisolone and lithium carbonicum again together with
sodium perchlorate. After another short-term of an improvement, deterioration
of the disease appeared (FT4K60.8 pmol/l (n!22), FT3K39.2 pmol/l (n!7),
TSH!0.04 mIU/l). The results of imaging studies justified AIT2 recognition.
Antithyroid  drugs  and  sodium  perchlorate  were  withdrawn.  High  dose  of
prednisolone was continued. In order to accelerate the elimination of the free
thyroid hormones three cycles of plasmapheresis were conducted. Normalization
of hormones was reached after five months of onset of the disease.
Conclusions
Similarly as in the case of patients without renal failure, only prednisone is
effective  in  treatment  of  AIT2
in  ESRD.  Hemodialysis  is  ineffective  and
plasmapheresis is slightly effective in the elimination of free thyroid hormones.
Monitoring of thyrotoxicosis and assessment of the effects of treatment in patients
with ESRD are difficult.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP355
EP356
Transient amenorrhea: a very rare complication of radioactive iodine
ablation therapy for papillary thyroid carcinoma
Buket Yilmaz Bulbul1, Mehmet Celik1, Semra Ayturk1, Nuray Can2,
Ebru Tastekin2, Atakan Sezer3, Funda Ustun4 & Sibel Guldiken1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolizm, Trakya University Medical
Faculty, Edirne, Turkey;2Department of Pathology, Trakya University
Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey;3Department of Surgery, Trakya
University Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey;4Department of Nuclear
Medicine, Trakya University Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey.
Radioactive  iodine
(RAI)  treatment  has  been  used  in  the  treatment  of
differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) since 1946. RAI treatment is recently used
as adjuvant treatment for ablation of residual tissue following thyroidectomy and
in the treatment of metastases of thyroid cancer. Some acute (nausea, vomiting,
ageusia, salivary gland swelling and pain) and long-term side effects (sialadenitis,
pulmonary fibrosis, second primary malignancies) may be observed following
RAI treatment. In 12-31% of young women, menstrual irregularities have been
reported after high dose radioactive iodine treatment applied for the treatment of
DTC. In this report, we presented two patients with DTC treated by RAI ablation,
in whom transient amenorrhea had occurred. Basal FSH and LH levels elevated in
these two patients within 3 months after RAI treatment, but all normalized within
6 months (table 1). We suggest that it is important to evaluate premenopausal
patients with DTC for the development of RAI related menstrual irregularity and
inform these patients for the possibility of treatment related ovarian dysfunction.
Table 1
Patient 1
Patient 2
Age
42
41
RAI dose (mCi)
100
150
3 months after RAI
LH (1.9-12.5 IU/l)
72.75
39
FSH (2.5-10.9 IU/l)
95.17
50.5
E2 (19.5-144.2 IU/l)
2.19
!5
6 months after RAI
LH (1.9-12.5 IU/l)
30.9
14
FSH (2.5-10.9 IU/l)
7.17
17
E2 (19.5-144.2 IU/l)
130.61
128
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP356
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP357
Postpartum osteoporosis associated with hypercalcemia and
hypoparathyroidism
Nur Kebapci, Goknur Yorulmaz & Aysen Akalın
Eskisehir Osmangazi University School of Medicine, Eskisehir, Turkey.
A lactating 31-year-old woman who developed L5 vertebral compression fracture
2 months after the delivery of her first child is presented. Serum concentrations of
Ca was 10.24 mg/dl (8.6-10.2 mg/dl), phosphorus was 4.1 mg/dl (2.7-4.5 mg/dl),
albumin was 4.6 mg/dl, ALP was 210 U/l (35-105 U/l), PTH was 13.8 pg/ml
(15-65).  There  was  axial  osteoporosis,  as  assessed  by  dual-energy  X-ray
absorptiometry. Z score; L1 (K3), L2 (K3.8), L3 (K3.8), L4 (K3.6). CCr
127 ml/min,
24 h Ca  excretion was
153.4 mg.
25-hydroxyvitamin  D  was
10.9 ng/ml. Causes for secondary osteoporosis were excluded. She was diagnosed
as  postpartum  osteoporosis  associated  with  hypercalcemia  and  probable
parathyroid  hormon-related  protein
(PTHrP)  hypersecretion.  Studies  have
established that the exogenous production of vitamin D requirements fall during
breast-feeding through a PTHrP and prolactin mediated mechanisms. PTHrP is
known to be physiological present in some tissues, especially in brest milk.
Production of PTHrP from the mammary gland in response to elevated prolactin
and lower estradiol levels leads to calcium and phosphate mobilization from bone.
Its role in control of total milk calcium content is postulated, and PTHrP may also
regulate  mammary  blood  flow  through  vasodilatory  mechanisms.  Our  case
highlights  the  importance  of  the  possible  aetiological  role  for  parathyroid
hormone-related peptide in derangements in calcium metabolism with postpartum
osteoporosis during lactation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP357
EP358
An acute gout attack following parathyroidectomy
Mustafa Unal1, Dilek Arpaci1, Basak Erol1,2 & Taner Bayraktaroglu1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bulent Ecevit University
Faculty of Medicine, Zonguldak, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine,
Bulent Ecevit University Faculty of Medicine, Zonguldak, Turkey.
Gout  is  an  arthritis  characterized  by  the  deposition  of  monosodium  urate
cyristales in the joints because of chronic hyperuricemia. Infections, intravenous
contrast materials, acidosis, trauma, surgical interventions can be counted as
common causes of acute gout attack. The aim of this study was to present
postoperative gout attack at a patient with parathyroidectomy.
Case
Sixty five year old man presented with back pain and fatique was admitted to our
endocrinology clinic with hypercalcemia (12.4 mg/dl) for further investigation.
He had a previous history of gout disease 5 years before admission but he said
never treated for gout. In the laboratory examination, her urine was 136, creatinin
was  3.5,  albumine  was
4.1,  calcium  was
12.4 mg/dl,  fosfor  was
3 mg/dl,
parathormone was 1386 ng/ml. In 24-hour-urine, calcium was measured as 365
mg/day. In his neck ultrasound, it was determined a 12!16!14 mm hypoechoic
lesion consistent with a parathyroid adenoma on right inferior posterior at the
inferior of gland. In urinary ultrasound, there was multiple stones. Patient
transferred to generel surgery department for parathyroidectomy operation. After
right  inferior  parathyroidectomy  operation,in  the  second  postoperative  day,
patient had high fever raised to 398C, pain, swelling, limitation in movements and
redness in metatarsopharyngeal joint at right foot. Other physical examinations
were normal. The uric acid level was studied and measured as 11.5 mg/dl. In the
diagnosis, a gout attack was thought and colchium 0.5 mg 3!1 was began for
treatment. The response to that therapy was fast. About in 24 h fever was lower,
pain was decreased and the general situation of patient gone well
Discussion
The likely reasons for postoperative flares include fluid shifts that alter the serum
urate level and may favor new medications that may elicit increases or decreases
in serum urate. Gantes et al. From Spain presented two cases with pseudo-gout
cases after parathyroidectomy. In their cases, gout symptoms began at second
post-operative day (like our cases) and they reported that acute attack symptoms
regressed with calcium replacement, using nsaid and 1 mg/day colchium.
In peri-operative term, the gout attack can begin with many factors. Catobolic
process in operative term, starvation or dehydration can induce the hyperuricemia
and gout. Postoperative gout appears in generally 8 day after surgery. The affected
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
joint part is same with the affected joint before surgery. If patients have previous
gout history prepare for a surgery, examination of uric acid levels should be done
and prophylactic colcium treatment should be given if needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP358
EP359
Postmenopausal women with hyperandrogenism: case reports of three
patients
Andreja Maric, Sonja Medjimurec, Tea Premosa & Dunja Molnar
County Hospital Cakovec, Cakovec, Croatia.
Introduction
Androgen excess in women usually is presented as hirsutism and alopecia.
Androgens could be expressed from adrenal or ovarian origin.
Case reports
Female, 57 years (yrs) old, presented with hirsutism (Ferriman Galwey score,
FGS  18),  weight  gain,  type
2
diabetes  mellitus
(DM2),  hypertension,
hyperlipidemia and obesity (BMI 38.5 kg/m2). Diagnostic evaluation revealed
normal  prolactin,  SHBG,  DHEAS,  IGF-1,  ACTH,  TSH,  serum  cortisol  in
overnight 1 mg dexamethasone test (19 nmol/l); total testosterone (6.0 nmol/l;
ref.!2.6),  free  testosterone
(94.8 pmol/l;  ref.!30)  and  androstendion
(14.1 umol/l; ref.!12) were increased. MRI of abdomen and pelvis showed
fatty  liver  and  myoma  uteri.  Bilateral  ovariectomy  was  performed;  PHD:
hyperthecosis. Signs of hyperandrogenism regressed.
Postmenopausal  woman,
59
yrs,  presented  with  perennial  DM2,  diabetic
retinopathy,  nephropathy,  hypertension,  hyperlipidemia,  hyperuricemia  and
obesity (BMI 39.8 kg/m2). She had weight gain for last 5 yrs, with expressed
hirsutism (FGS 28). Despite basal-bolus insulin therapy glycemic control is poor
(HbA1c 9.6%). Diagnostic evaluation revealed normal serum cortisol in overnight
1 mg dexamethasone test (63.5 nmol/l), normal prolactin, TSH, SHBG, DHEAS,
IGF-1, ACTH. Total testosterone (4.1 nmol/l) and free testosterone (72.9 pmol/l)
were increased. MRI of abdomen and pelvis showed normal adrenal glands,
myoma uteri (25.2!21.7!18 mm), left ovary solid, enlarged 29.3!19.5 mm,
and right ovary 14.4!8.6 mm in size. Tumor marker CA125 was normal. The
patient refused suggested gynecologic surgery, applying only cosmetic treatment.
Female, 58 yrs, presented with postmenopausal hirsutism (FGS 14) and alopecia;
DM2, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity (BMI 31.2 kg/m2).Total testosterone
was 2.9 nmol/l and free testosterone 58.2 pmol/l. MR of abdomen and pelvis
revealed enlarged ovaries. Bilateral ovariectomy was performed; PHD: Cellular
steroid  ovarian  tumor. Signs  of  hyperandrogenism  regressed,  DM2
is well
controlled with metformin.
Conclusion
Resolving the origin of androgen excess is important for adequate treatment.
Ovariectomy  in  described  cases  resulted  in  regression  of  signs  of
hyperandrogenism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP359
EP360
Pretibial myxedema in a euthyroid patient without history of
autoimmune thyroid disease
Panagiotis Anagnostis1, Aikaterini Artzouchaltzi1, Alexandra Grekou2,
Dimitrios Stogiannou1, Anastasia Skalkou1, Nifwn Gekas1,
Spyridon Gerou3 & Vasilios Tzalokostas1
1Divisions of Dermatology and Endocrinology, Police Medical Center of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece;2Laboratory of Histopathology
‘Histodiagnostiki’, Thessaloniki, Greece;3Laboratories ‘Analysis’,
Thessaloniki, Greece.
Introduction
Pretibial myxedema (PM) is a rare extrathyroidal manifestation of Graves’
disease, with most patients being in hyperthyroid state. PM has also rarely been
described in Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Case report
A 61-year old Caucasian woman attended our outpatient dermatology clinic for
evaluation and management of bilateral erythema, involving the lower two-thirds
of the pretibial regions. She reported appearance of the same lesion 11 years ago.
Medical history was remarkable for subtotal thyroidectomy due to non-toxic
multinodular  goiter,  breast  cancer,  type
2
diabetes  mellitus  and  arterial
hypertension. There was no history of thyrotoxicosis or ophthalmopathy. No
smoking or alcohol was reported.
Clinical examination revealed the presence of itchy bilateral, edematous pretibial
erythema, with ‘peau d’; orange’ appearance. No signs of ophthalmopathy or
acropathy were observed.
Laboratory investigation showed: TSH: 0.89 mIU/l (normal range: 0.4-4) and
free-thyroxine:
1.32 ng/ml (normal  range:
0.8-1.5). Thyroid peroxidase and
thyroglobulin antibodies were negative, as well as, thyroid stimulating and
inhibitory immunoglobulins (TSI and TBII, respectively).
Neck ultrasonography revealed the presence of significant thyroid remnant, with
mild heterogeneity regarding its echogenic structure, without nodules.
A skin biopsy from the pretibial skin was performed which showed edema of the
reticular dermis presenting as empty slit-like spaces separating collagen fibers,
with normal fibroblasts. Stellate fibroblasts (myofibroblasts) in papillary dermis
and perivascular infiltrate of lymphocytes were observed. The histochemical stain
Alcian blue  pH 2.5 showed mild increase of acid mucopolysaccharides in
papillary dermis. These findings were consistent with PM.
The patient was successfully managed with topical application of corticosteroids,
with significant amelioration of her lesions one month later.
Conclusions
This is a rare case of PM in a euthyroid patient, with no evidence of thyroid
autoimmunity. Six other euthyroid PM cases have been reported (one with
positive TSI, two with negative TSI and not measured in the other cases).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP360
EP361
131I uptake in nonlactating breast related to papillary thyroid
carcinoma
Josu Pérez Yeboles1, Ihintza Larran˜ aga Unanue1 & Ioana Cillero Etxebeste2
1Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital de Mendaro, Gipuzkoa,
Spain;2Nuclear Medicine Department, Instituto Oncológico de Kutxa,
Gipuzkoa, Spain.
Introduction
Radioiodine whole-body scintigraphy (WBS) has been widely used for detection
of differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC), based on the marked storage of iodine in
functioning thyroid tissue. However, radioiodine uptake is not specific for thyroid
gland. Iodine accumulation in lactating breast has been demonstrated, but it is rare
in nonlactating breast.
Case report
A 74-year-old-woman who underwent near-total thyroidectomy in 1988 due to a
multinodular non-toxic goitre, presented during the surveillance a suspicious left
thyroid  nodule.  Ultrasound
(US)  guided  fine  needle  aspiration
(FNA)  was
performed and the cytologic examination showed a follicular proliferation with
atypia. A total thyroidectomy and selective lymphadenectomy was realised
because of macroscopic lymph node affectation. Pathology examination showed a
1.1 cm  papillary  thyroid  carcinoma  and  regional  lymph  node  metastases.
Radioiodine ablation with 100 mCi131I was realised after the surgery. WBS
was  negative  for  extrathyroidal  metastases.  Patient  presented  progressive
elevation of thyroglobulin (34 ng/ml) and increasing antithyroglobulin antibodies
(307 UI/ml). US identified left III cervical compartment lymph node involve-
ment. 150 mCi131I were administrated after recombinant human thyrotropin
injection. Postablative WBS showed focal intense uptake in left cervical region
and increase uptake in bilateral breasts. Hyperprolactinemia (serum prolactin
110 mg/ml) was found in biochemical test and a magnetic resonance imaging
detected a pituitary microadenoma (6 mm). Medical treatment was rejected due to
the postmenopausal condition.
Conclusions
Radioactive iodine uptake in functioning thyroid tissue is mediated by enhanced
expression of sodium-iodide symporter (NIS). This case illustrates that not only
lactating breast can concentrate iodine, but also in nonlacting mammary gland the
presence of prolactin hypersecretor pituitary gland tumour can induce increased
NIS expression and therefore prominent accumulation of iodine.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP361
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP362
Lenalidomide-induced hyperthyroidism during treatment for
anaplastic multiple myeloma: a case report
Mazhar Dalvi & Faisal Dalvi
1Al Noor Hospital, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates;2Aster Medical
Centre, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Lenalidomide a thalidomide derivative has immunomodulatory, antiangiogenic
and anticancer properties.Lenalidomide has significantly improved survival in
myeloma although toxicity,side effects do occur.
We report a case of thyroiditis with hyperthyroidism in a patient receiving
lenalidomide in treatment for Anaplastic multiple myeloma.
Case Presentation
Sixty four year old female with anaplastic multiple myeloma but no history of
thyroid disease received Lenalidomide 25 mg once daily orally for 21 days of
repeated 28-day cycles. She developed hyperthyroidism during the course of the
treatment, with TSH of 0.003 mIU/ml (0.35-4.94 mIU/ml) decreasing from a
normal baseline of 0.93 mIU/ml two months prior. Free T4 and Free T3 was
elevated at 2.25 ng/dl (0.7-1.8 ng/dl) and 5.01 pg/ml (1.7-3.7 pg/ml) respect-
ively. There were no interim medication changes, recent contrast CT, viral illness,
amiodarone or interferon treatment. Patient denied overt hyperthyroid symptoms,
with  stable  vital  signs,unremarkable  physical  exam
(no  exophthalmos,
thyromegaly or palpable thyroid nodules, normal reflexes). The creatinine went
up to 1.7 mg/dl from baseline of 0.6 mg/dl (0.6-1.1 mg/dl).Lenalidomide was
implicated and was discontinued for 6 weeks. After 6 weeks, TSH spontaneously
normalized to 1.34 mIU/ml, and creatinine improved to 1.1 mg/dl, lenalidomide
was restarted at reduced dose of 20 mg daily. Two weeks later, TSH dropped to
0.005 mIU/ml, FT4 increased to 2.27 ng/dl.
Further work-up
TSH  receptor  antibodies
(Trabs):  normal,  thyroidperoxidase  antibodies  and
thyroglobulin antibodies: normal Thyroglobulin 800 ng/ml (1-50 ng/ml).
ESR 82 (!30). Thyroid ultrasound showed a heterogeneous gland and findings
were suggestive of thyroiditis. Thyroid pertechnetate scan showed minimal
uptake, suggesting Lenalidomide-induced thyroiditis.
Her  hyperthyroidism  again  spontaneously  resolved  after  Lenalidomide  was
stopped following completion of 6 cycles of chemotherapy.
Conclusion
Lenalidomide  is  increasingly  used  in  the  treatment  of  myelodysplastic
syndromes. Treating physicians must be aware of potential thyroid dysfunction
associated with lenalidomide treatment. Checking thyroid function before starting
the treatment and throughout the course is recommended.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP362
EP363
Ovarian Leydig cell hyperplasia - an unusual cause of
hyperandrogenism in a post-menopausal woman with a possible
familial link
Sajjad Ahmad, Naveed Khalily & Stuart Lee
Diabetes and Endocrine Department, Wrexham Maelor Hospital, Wrexham,
North Wales, UK.
A 60-year-old lady was referred with male pattern hair loss and facial hirsutism of
5-7 years duration. She was otherwise well and had two children in their 30s. She
was not taking any medication and reported a normal menstrual cycle prior to
menopause at the age of 50.
Her androgen profile showed a high testosterone level of 6.1 nmol/l (range !2.5),
androstenedione
3.8 nmol/l
(0.7-3.8),  DHEAS
5.7 mm/l
(0.80-4.9),  SHBG
33 nmol/l, FAI 17.9% (0.1-2.6). LH was 22 IU/l and FSH 59.6 IU/l consistent
with post-menopausal state. Thyroid function was normal.
CT of adrenals showed no evidence of tumour. Pelvic US showed a normal right
ovary, left ovary not visualized.
She  subsequently  underwent  laparoscopic  bilateral  salpingo-oophorectomy.
Ovarian histopathology indicated Leydig cell hyperplasia, an uncommon cause
of  hyperandrogenism  in  post-menopausal  women.  Her  testosterone  level
normalized to 1.3 nmol/l 3 months after surgery.
Interestingly her elder sister had also undergone bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
3 years earlier. She had been found to have a testosterone level of 7.0 with clinical
evidence of virilization. Her ovarian histology was unremarkable. In light of
family history slides from 2013 were recently re-examined by a Histopathologist.
No evidence of Leydig cell hyperplasia was seen but it was suggested that this
could be focal and therefore not present in the tissue sampled.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Leydig cell hyperplasia causing hyperandrogenism in women is rare with several
case reports only in the literature. This case raises the possibility of a genetic
component which has been described in males due to LH receptor mutations but
never reported in females to the best of our knowledge. Our patient has not yet had
genetic testing. Normal ovarian imaging does not exclude an ovarian source of
hyperandrogenism and bilateral oophorectomy is a safe and effective procedure
after excluding an adrenal source.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP363
EP364
Ectopic thyroid of young child with severe dysphagia: a surgical
indication
Mohamed Samir Merad1, Zakaria Benziane1, Fatiha Mohammedi1 &
Amina Benouis2
1Service d’endocrinologie-diabétologie Clinique Lariberre CHU du Dr
Benzerdjeb, Oran, Algeria;2Laboratoire de Biologie du développement et
de la différenciation, Faculté des sciences, Université d’Oran, Oran, Algeria.
Introduction
Ectopic thyroid tissue can be found anywhere along the normal path of thyroid
descent, but is most commonly found at the base of the tongue, in which case it
may be referred to as a lingual thyroid. Although the patients are usually
asymptomatic, it can lead to symptoms such as dysphonia and dysphagia. We
present a child patient with a lingual thyroid resulting in severe dysphagia that
was cured surgically.
Case reports
An 4-year-old male child presented to our department for failure to thrive estimate
at less 2 DS. He Present a severe dysphagia to food, some episodes of transitional
dyspnea, hypothyroidism treated since 1 year with lévothyrox. Examination of the
neck revealed no palpable thyroid gland in the normal prétrachéale position, no
cervical adenopathy and normal oral cavity.
Thyroid hormone tests showed elevated TSH, TG (thyroglobulin) concentrations
and decreased FT3, FT4 concentrations. The ultrasound exam shows an oval mass
lobed echogenic and homogeneous measuring 1.4!1.0 cm without discernable
isthmus. The thyroid scintigraphy with 99mTc-Pertechnetate showed an uptake
region at the base of the tongue representing a lingual thyroid. There was no
thyroid uptake in the usual site in the neck. CT image showing intensely
enhancing mass in the base of tongue and absent native thyroid issue in the
thyroid bed.
Increased dose L-thyroxine was started and surgery because sever dysphagia was
performed. The patient made a good post-operative recovery and the clinically
symptoms decreased.
Conclusion
An  ectopic  thyroid  should  be  considered  in  any  child  with  presence  of
hypothyroidism and surgical indication is to be expected after exploring all
dyspnea and/or dysphagia.
Keywords: lingual thyroid, hypothyroidism, child, dysphagia, surgical indication
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP364
EP365
Graves’ orbitopathy and Graves’ disease after bone marrow transplant
in a patient with Fanconi anemia
Luminita Nicoleta Cima1, Lavinia Stejereanu1, Ioana Maria Lambrescu1,
Anca Colita1,3, Carmen Gabriela Barbu1,2 & Simona Fica1,2
1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;
2Endocrine Department, Elias Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;3Hematology
Department, Fundeni Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Endocrinopathies  are  a  common  late  effect  of  haematopietic  stem  cell
transplantation, resulting in thyroid dysfunction, impaired growth and pubertal
development during childhood and metabolic syndrome. Because of the possible
endocrine  complications,  transplanted  patients  need  life-long  endocrine
follow-up.
Case report
A 14-year-old male patient with a history of Fanconi anemia (7 years), bone
marrow transplant (10 years) and Graves Disease (13 years) was admitted in our
endocrine department for evaluation in November 2015. He was diagnosed six
month  ago  with  hyperthyroidism
(TSH!0.004 uIU/ml,  FT4Z4.44 ng/ml,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
ATPOZ324 IU/ml,  TRAbZ28 U/l)  and  started  treatment  with  metimazole
(MMI). On antithyroid drugs his symptomatology improved, with normalization
of FT4 and TT3 (TSH remained suppressed), but when we tried to decrease the
dose of MMI, FT4 and TT3 became elevated again and the dose of metimazole
was increased again at 20 mg/day. At present admission the physical exam
revealed  goiter,  HZ151.6 cm
(K1.25  S.D.),  WZ49 kg,  BMIZ21.32 kg/m2,
upper eyelids swelling, retraction of the lower eyelids, discrete eyelids erythema,
mild exophtalmia, especially at his left eye-signs that were not present in
September, at his last visit in our hospital. The ophtalmological consultation
diagnosed evolutive orbitopathy and suggested considering glucorticoid therapy.
The level of TSH receptor antibodies decreased during antithyroid treatment, but
they  were  still  elevated
(14.2).  He  started  a
6-month  course  of  selenium
supplementation
(100 mg/day)  and  pulsetherapy  with  methyprednisolone
125 mg/week for 3 weeks and 250 mg/week for the next 3 weeks with a good
clinical outcome.
Conclusion
Graves’ orbitopathy is a rare complication in transplanted patients and was not
present in our patient from the start. In this situation, euthyroidism is essential for
improvement of eye changes, but sometimes other therapeutic interventions are
needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP365
EP366
Case report: endoscopic ultrasonography can be used as an adjunctive
procedure in atypically localized and conventional ultrasound negative
parathyroid adenoma
Neslihan Cuhaci1, Cevdet Aydin1, Osman Ersoy2, Aylin Kilic Yazgan3,
Ibrahim Kilinc4, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of
Gastroenterology, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey;3Department of Pathology, Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;4Department of General Surgery,
Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Ectopic and atypically localized parathyroid adenomas such as in the anterior
mediastinum, paraesophageal or retrotracheal position, although rare, can be seen
in clinical practice. Ultrasound (US) which is a frequently used and one of the best
conventional imaging modality sometimes fails to identify the lesion especially in
atypically localized adenomas. Endoscopic US (EUS) is a new technique that can
be  used  for  localization  of  parathyroid  lesions.  We  reported  a  case  with
paraeosophageal parathyroid adenoma which was localized accurately with EUS.
Case
A 55-year-old woman with papillary thyroid microcarcinoma (PTMC) (0.8 cm in
size) was operated 5 years ago. After the thyroid surgery her Ca levels (10.5-
11 mg/dl) were found as elevated. She had been evaluated for hypercalcemia and
PTH level was also found elevated. In her neck ultrasound (US) and parathyroid
scintigraphy no pathology was found. Since she had no operation indication for
asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism she had been followed for 5 years. Bone
mineral densitometry revealed osteoporosis in lumbal vertebraes. Neck US found
no pathology. Recent parathyroid scintigraphy revealed parathyroid adenoma in
the posterior of the trachea in the inferior thyroid region. Neck and upper
mediastinal computerised tomography showed heterogenous solid nodular lesion
in the superior right paraeosophageal region 11 mm in size. In order to determine
the exact localization of the parathyroid adenoma EUS was performed and
detected  a  hypoechoic  lesion  close  to  esophagus  on  the  right  parathyroid
localization. The patient underwent parathyroidectomy with minimally invasive
procedure, parathyroid adenoma was detected and excised.
Conclusion
Preoperative localization of parathyroid pathology is important in appropriate
cases of minimal invasive surgery. EUS can be accepted as a tool for detection of
parathyroid  adenoma.  When  the  other  imaging  methods  are  negative  or
conflicting, EUS can be considered in these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP366
EP367
A case with atypical parathyroid lipoadenoma presented with severe
hypercalcemia and skeletal deformities
Cuneyt Bilginer1, Oya Topaloglu1, Neslihan Cuhaci1, Gurkan Dumlu2,
Aylin Kilic Yazgan3, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of General
Surgery, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey;3Department of Pathology, Ataturk Education and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Parathyroid lipoadenoma (PLA) is a rarely seen, benign variant of parathyroid
adenoma (PA). However, PA usually consists of uniform, polygonal chief cells
with a few nests of oxyphil cells, PLA consists of similar histologic features, but
with an abundance of fat cells. Additionally, PLA may be functional with the
secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) or non-functional. Here, we present a
case  of  atypical  PLA  presented  with  severe  hypercalcemia  and  skeletal
deformities.
Case
A 41-year-old male referred to emergency department due to the cranial trauma
following the syncope episode. In his cranial magnetic resonance imaging no
pathology was found. He had no chronic disease except hypertension. His
laboratory evaluation revealed elevated creatinine and calcium (Ca) levels (1.7
and 14.3 mg/dl, respectively). PTH level was found 735 pg/ml, urinary calcium
excretion was found 348 mg/24 h. Neck ultrasound (US) revealed an isoechoic
mass with 18.5!29.5!38.7 mm in size in the left inferior part of the thyroid
gland which was consistent with parathyroid scintigraphy. Grade I hypertensive
retinopathy  was  detected  in  ophtalmological  examination.  Bone  mineral
densitometry  revealed  severe  osteoporosis,  especially  in  lumbal  vertebraes.
Pathologic fracture was not determined in vertebral graphics. He had severe
scoliosis and pectus excavatum. Ca levels were regressed to 12 mg/dl with
intravenous hydration and diuretic treatment. He had underwent left hemithyr-
oidectomy and parathyroidectomy and pathology was revealed atypical PLA and
benign thyroid disease. Also the surgical specimen was revealed a large size mass
with a 5 cm in diameter and neoplastic cells were seen in one area in the capsule.
Conclusion
Although PLAs are benign lesions, our case had atypical features. He had severe
osteoporosis  and  skeletal  anomalies  in  addition  to  severe  hypercalcemia.
However, there has been no known malignant PLA, the cases which show
atypical features should be followed closely.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP367
EP368
Is b2-microglobulin a specific marker of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma?
Buket Yilmaz Bulbul1, Mehmet Celik1, Semra Ayturk1, Nuray Can2,
Ebru Tastekin2, Atakan Sezer3, Funda Ustun4 & Sibel Guldiken1
1Trakya University Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolizm, Edirne, Turkey;2Trakya University Medical Faculty,
Department of Pathology, Edirne, Turkey;3Trakya University Medical
Faculty, Department of Surgery, Edirne, Turkey;4Trakya University
Medical Faculty, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Edirne, Turkey.
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is the most aggressive and lethal thyroid
malignancy. The median survival time following diagnosis is typically 6 months
or less. b2 microglobulin (b2-MG) is a component of MHC class I molecules,
which exists in all nucleated cells except red blood cells and placental trophoblast
cells. Levels of beta-2 microglobulin can be elevated in multiple myeloma,
lymphoma and amyloidosis. In few studies on anaplastic thyroid cancer, b2-MG
levels were found to be elevated especially in the subjects with lymph node
metastasis.
A 71-year-old woman presented with a rapidly enlarging neck mass present for
the last 4 weeks. Physical examination revealed a 3 cm sized tender thyroid mass
on the right lobe and 2 cm sized lymph nodes on right cervical region. Anti-
thyroglobulin antibody and anti-TPO were positive, TSH, FT4 and FT3 levels
were normal. Leukocyte: 4730 ml (n: 3980-10 040), hemoglobin: 10.6 (n: 12-15)
gr/dl, thrombocyte: 210 000 ml (n: 150 000-450 000), sedimetation: 44 mm/h
(n: 0-20), CRP: 0.11 mg/dl (n : 0-0.34), urea: 36 mg/dl (n: 15-43), creatinin: 1
(n: 0.57-1.11), LDH: 622 U/l (n: 125-220), calcitonin!2 pg/ml (n: 0-10) and
b2-MG levels obtained at different time points were 3418, 3296 and 3882 ng/ml
(n:
1010-2500). On neck ultrasonography, thyroid parenchyma was hetero-
geneous and there were multiple, macrocalcific, hypoechoic nodules, the biggest
one was being 35!28!30 mm in size in the right thyroid lobe. There were 2 cm
sized, multiple, spherical lymph nodes with irregular borders and invisible fatty
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
hilum in the right anterocervical region. Lymphoma and thyroid cancer were
considered  as  differential  diagnoses.  Peripheral  blood  smear  and  protein
electrophoresis were found to be normal. Tru-cut biopsy samples obtained from
lymph nodes in the right anterior cervical region and nodule in the right thyroid
lobe detected anaplastic carcinoma with rhabdoid variant. The patient was
referred to the department of oncology for chemo-radiotherapy.
In conclusion, further studies are required to confirm whether b2-MG can be used
as a specific marker for thyroid cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP368
EP369
Simultaneous diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus and insulinoma:
diagnostic pitfalls
Grzegorz Swider & Joanna Sztembis
Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology and Endocrinology,
St. Queen Jadwiga Hospital No. 2, Rzeszow, Poland.
Introduction
Co-morbidity of DM t 2 and insulinoma is extremely rare. There are only some
case  reports  of  diagnosing  insulinoma  but  they  concern  patients  already
diagnosed with DM t. 2. We present patient diagnosed at the same time with
DM t. 2 and insulinoma.
Case report
A 69-year-old female patient was admitted to hospital because of high blood
pressure.  Since
2 years  she  reported  attacks  of  weakness,  tachycardia  and
sweating within the day, usually several hours after food intake or directly after
physical effort or rarely while fasting. The food intake resolved the symptoms.
Physical examination revealed blood pressure 200/100 mmHg, BMI 26 kg/m2,
abdominal  obesity,  waist  circumflex
89 cm.  By  prolonged
5-hours  OGTT
diabetes with reactive hypoglycemia at hour 5 of test was diagnosed. Abdominal
US revealed hepar steatosis. Antibodies: anti-GAD, ICA, IAA were negative.
During hospitalization fasting glycaemia levels were within range of 3.22-
6.33 mmol/l and postprandial levels were: 3.61-8.94 mmol/l. Hypothyroidism,
adrenal insufficiency, kidney and hepar failure were excluded. Screening cancer
exams  were  negative.  We  performed  fasting  test.  After
14 h  symptomatic
hypoglycaemia: 2.44 mmol/l was observed with inadequately high levels of
insulin and C-peptide. Endogenic hyperinsulinaemia was diagnosed. CT scans
revealed pancreatic tumor diameter 17 mm. The patient underwent surgical
treatment. Histopathological examination confirmed well differentiated endocrine
tumor. 3 months after operation she was treated with metformine and remained
euglicaemic. C-peptide level was normalized.
Conclusion
1. Diagnosis of DM t 2 should not be followed by abandoning diagnosis of fasting
hypoglycaemia when there are morning or frequent postprandial hypoglycemia
episodes within the day.
2. Hypoglicaemia must not be always typical sign of the early stage o the diabetes
mellitus. Other causes should be considered even insulinoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP369
EP370
Apolipoprotein B deficiency
Eyvee Arturo Cuellar Lloclla, Ignacio Fernández Pen˜ a, Guillermo
Martinez de Pinillos Gordillo, Ignacio Domingo Fernández Lopez,
Fernando García Pérez, Álvaro Romero Porcel, Mariana Tome
Fernandez Ladreda, Juan Manuel García de Quiros Mun˜oz & María Victoria
Cozar León
Hospital Universitario Virgen del Valme, Sevilla, Spain.
Introduction
Family hypobetalipoproteinemia (HBF) is a rare genetic disorder, in 50% of cases
are due to mutations APOB gene, which leads to decreased values of total
cholesterol, low density lipoprotein (LDL-cholesterol) and apo-B. It is inherited
as an autosomal dominant and heterozygous carriers are usually asymptomatic.
Clinical case
Thirty-two-year-old male with abdominal pain and diarrhea associated with food,
no relevant history and physical examination standard, which hypolipidemia
is  detected.  Once  discarded  hypolipidemia  secondary  causes  of  decreased
cholesterol
(85 mg/dl),  triglycerides
(20 mg/dl),  c-LDL
(32 mg/dl),  apo-B
(23 mg/dl) with slightly elevated levels are confirmed TGP (50 U/l) and lack of
vitamin E (473).The family proceeded to study lipid and other affected cases with
an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern detected suspect mutation in the gene
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
for apoB. The genetic study of the index case confirmed the presence of a
mutation in compound heterozygosity for the ApoB gene. With low-fat dietary
treatment the patient’s symptoms disappeared are currently taking supplements of
vitamin E.
Discussion
The HBF affects lipoproteins containing apo-B, so that heterozygous carriers have
decreased levels of apo-B 25-30% of normal, while asymptomatic but most often
present  as  hepatic  steatosis  and  our  homozygous  paciente.Los  compound
heterozygotes  have  a  similar  clinical  picture  Abetalipoproteinemia  also
frequently presenting our case as diarrhea and index deficit soluble vitamins,
mainly A, D and E.
Conclusions
The presence of LDL cholesterol and ApoB below P5 for the population should
make  us  suspect  the  presence  of  HBF.  The  genetic  study  differentiates
heterozygous and homozygous forms allowing family counseling and appropriate
treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP370
EP371
A girl with Cornelia de Lange syndrome with good response on
GH therapy: case report
George-Sebastian Zmau1, Alina Daniela Beleceanu1, Cristina Rusu2,
Elena Braha1,2, Maria-Christina Ungureanu1, Roxana Stefan1,
Adina Manolachie1, Ioana Armasu1, Georgiana Constantinescu1 &
Carmen Vulpoi1
1Department of Endocrinology, U.M.F. ‘Grigore. T. Popa’ Iasi, Iasi,
Romania;2Department of Genetics, U.M.F. ‘Grigore. T. Popa’ Iasi, Iasi,
Romania.
Introduction
Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CDLS) a relatively uncommon genetic disorder
diagnosed mainly by clinical features: distinctive facial features, developmental
delay, hirsutism, mental retardation and structural abnormalities. Most cases are
due  to  spontaneous  mutations
(NIPBL  on  chromosome  5,  SMC1A  on  X
chromosome, and SMC3 on chromosome 10). Short stature in CDLS is due to GH
deficiency and resistance.
Case report
We present a 9-year-old girl, B.A., which was addressed to the Endocrinology
Department for growth retardation, with severe short stature (86 cm, K3 S.D.) and
underweight (11.5 kg, K3 S.D.), delayed bone age (2 years), but normal GH
profile.  She  was  an  only  child  of  non-consanguineous  marriage,  naturally
delivered on term, Apgar score of 8, small for gestational age (birth weight of
1850 g) and delays in milestones during development. Clinically diagnosed with
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CDLS) at the age of 3: low anterior hair line, bushy
eyebrows meeting in mid-line, low set ears, maxillary hypoplasia, small hands,
clinodactyly, and hypertrichosis. One year later, because of the stationary height,
she was reevaluated for GH deficiency: GH was not stimulated (4.93 ng/ml), with
low IGF1 (85.1 ng/ml, n: 49-283) and GH therapy was started. After 5 years of
treatment she gained 38 cm (7.5 cm/year of treatment, actual height 124 cm,
K2.9 S.D.), with ameliorated bone age (7 years).
Conclusions
CDLS has been characterized by small gestational age, growth retardation,
distinctive  facial  dimorphism,  primordial  short  stature,  psychomotor  delay,
behavioral problems. Patients suffering from CDLS have a normal puberty but
without growth spurt (final stature is approximately 155 cm in men and 133 cm in
women). Despite the bKIGS data which did not find an apropriate response at GH
treatment at short term, our patient showed a satisfactory growth velocity,
probably due to the associated GH deficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP371
EP372
Recurrent pancreatitis and an ectopic parathyroid - an unsavoury
combination
Shyam Sundar Seshadri, Kashif Kazmi & Singhan Krishnan
Hinchingbrooke Hospital, Huntingdon, UK.
Introduction
Pancreatitis due to hypercalcemia from primary hyperparathyroidism is rare with
an incidence of 1-1.5%. We report on a case of recurrent pancreatitis secondary to
an ectopic parathyroid adenoma with co-existing severe vitamin D deficiency
with its management difficulties.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Case report
A 45-year-old male admitted to the hospital with abdominal pain and attendant
nausea had investigations ruling out structural lesions for his symptoms but
ultrasound  evidence  of  acute  pancreatitis.  He  was  noted  to  have  severe
hypercalcemia with raised amylase. He was managed conservatively and further
evaluation  revealed  elevated  parathormone  levels.  An  ultrasound  of  his
parathyroid failed to localize any adenoma while the sestamibi scan showed
activity in the right para sternocleidomastoid region consistent with an ectopic
parathyroid tissue. He has had two further admissions with acute pancreatitis
secondary  to  hypercalcemia.  Co-existing  severe  vitamin  D  deficiency  was
discovered which required correction to optimize his chances of a successful
outcome post-surgery. This case was challenging because of its rarity. Vitamin D
deficiency correction attempts frequently led to severe hypercalcemia which in
itself posed additional risk of recurrent pancreatitis. The patient was referred for
urgent consideration of surgery for removal of his ectopic parathyroid.
Conclusion
Primary hyperparathyroidism may rarely provoke acute pancreatitis but for
recurrent pancreatitis to occur is indeed very unusual save for hereditary primary
hyperparathyroidism. Our patient in question had an ectopic parathyroid which
was revealed by adopting a more intensive investigation approach following
initial negative ultrasound. Correcting severe vitamin D deficiency with careful
management of severe hypercalcemia presents its own treatment challenges
especially with stone formation in the urinary tract but recurrent pancreatitis
triggered by hypercalcemia presents a management nightmare which involves
close monitoring of numbers as a prelude to ensuring an optimal outcome
following surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP372
EP373
A rare cause of hypoglycemia in a diabetic woman: insulinoma
Kenan C¸ adırcı1, Faruk Yıldız1, Hakan Sevimli1, Hakan Gozcu1,
Yasemin Kaya2, Havva Keskin3 & Ay¸e 
¸ arlıo
˘ lu1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Regional Education and Research
Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Ordu
University Hospital, Ordu, Turkey;3Department of Internal Medicine,
Goztepe Regional Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Insulinoma is generally a rare benign tumor of the pancreas islet cell. The typical
clinical symptom of insulinoma are repetitive hypoglycemia attacks. Insulinoma
with coexisting diabetes is extremely rare condition, We aim to present a case
with insulinoma conmomittant with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Case report
A 65-year-old woman diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus was admitted by
our internal medicine clinic. She complained from perspiration and tremor when
she was hungry. She was taken metformin 2000 mg/day for 3 years. In the first
laboratory analysis, plasma glucose was 62 mg/dl and HBA1c was 4.4%. Plasma
glucose  maintained  to  decrease,  although  metformin  treatment  was  quitted
because of hypoglycemia. Plasma glucose during hypoglycemia was detected
47 mg/dl, insulin 35.3 mIU/ml (2.4-23.3) and C peptide 3.51 ng/ml (0.9-4). It
was performed abdominal CT for the possibility of insulinoma. In the abdominal
CT, it was monitored a well-circumscribed mass, approximately in the size of
21!20!17 mm in pancreas caudal part. Distal pancreatectomy was performed
in the patient. Pathological outcome of the patient was reported as insulinoma.
There was no hypoglycemia in the patient after the operation.
Conclusions
It is not easy to diagnose insulinoma for hypoglycemic symptoms in diabetic
patients are associated with diabetes treatment. When diabetic patients have
frequent hypoglycemia, insulinoma is also thought.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP373
EP374
From Horner’s syndrome to primary hyperparathyroidism: a case
report
Maria Kurowska1, Joanna Malicka1, Witold Chudzinski2 & Jerzy S. Tarach1
1Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland;
2Department of General and Endocrinological Surgery, Medical University,
Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction
Horner’s syndrome represents a clinical symptom that may result from a variety
of lesions both in the central and peripheral nervous system. It is a combination of
ipsilateral  ptosis,  pupillary  miosis  and  anisocoria,  enophthalmos  and  facial
anhydrosis induced by disruption of the sympathetic innervation of the eye
anywhere along its three-neuron trail. Tumors are the most frequent causes of
Horner’s syndrome.
Aim
Aim of the study was to present a rare case of Horner’s syndrome caused by
parathyroid adenoma.
Case report
50-year-old man was initially diagnosed in neurology ward because of right
Horner’s syndrome in the form of ptosis, pupillary miosis and enophthalmos. CT
of the neck disclosed 30!26!16 mm homogenous solid tumor strictly adhering
to the posterior contour of the right lobe of the thyroid with initial density 56 HU.
Differential diagnosis included: atypical part of the thyroid gland, parathyroid
adenoma or paraganglioma (in MRI). 99mTc-MIBI parathyroid scintigraphy
revealed an area of increased tracer accumulation that could correspond to
enlarged right parathyroid gland. PTH level was 347-426 pg/ml (n!72), total
calcium level
11.8-12.9 mg/dl (n!10.4), ionized calcium 1.64-1.67 mmol/l
(n!1.32). Low concentration of serum phosphorus (2.3 mg/dl) and increased
urine calcium excretion (570-950 mg/24 h, n!300) were also observed. 25(OH)
D3 blood level was 14.39 ng/ml (nO30). Due to the suspicion of PTH-secreting
paraganglioma  daily  urine  excretion  of  methoxycatecholamines
(913
and
742 mg/24 h; n!1000) and biopsy of the lesion (parathyroid tissue) have been
done. During surgery a tumor of the right upper parathyroid gland has been
removed. The postoperative pathologic examination revealed 4.5!2.5!21.3 cm
parathyroid adenoma. The Horner’s syndrome symptoms did not resolve after
surgery.
Conclusion
Among the many causes of Horner’s syndrome, parathyroid tumor should be
taken into account in the differential diagnosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP374
EP375
Parathyroid adenomas: critical appraisal of surgical therapy in 18 cases
Mihai Radu Diaconescu & Smaranda Diaconescu
“Gr T Popa” University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania.
Background
Parathyroid adenomas represent the most common anatomoclinical variety of
hyperparathyroidism.
Material and method
From our experience of 84 cases of hyperparathyroidism - 20 primary and 64
‘renal’ (CKD-MBD) - 18 patients underwent surgery for solitary adenomas of
these  glands.  Clinical  data,  laboratory  and  imaging  test  results,  surgical
procedures and outcome were comprehensively analysed.
Results
We registered 16 women and only two men, aged between 16-58 (mean 46)
years. From the clinical point of view bone manifestations prevailed in six cases,
those of urolithiasis in nine cases and pancreatic phenomena in two cases. One
patient was asymptomatic being discovered incidentally during a thyroidectomy.
The mean serum calcium at the time of diagnosis was 11.5G2.2 mg/dl but serun
phosphorus was 4.4G0.5 mg/dl. The mean parathyroid hormone (PTH) level
(measured in only 12 patients) ranged between 127-778 pg/ml. Ultrasonography
acurately  identified  lesions  in
16
cases  and  TechnetiumZ99 m  sestamibi
scintigra-phy in only five cases. Eighteen adenomectomies were performed of
which bilateral neck exploration was done in 16 patients and minimally invasive
approach in the remaining two cases. In seven situations concomitant thyroid
exeresis  were  done  for  associated  lesions  or  imposed  by  tactical  purpose.
Pathologic examination revealed single adenoma consisting of main and oxyphil
cells in 17 cases. In one patient an atypical adenoma was identified and in another
case
3 years  after  removal  of  a  benign  adenoma  the  subject  presented  a
homolateral clinical recurrence, which proved to be a carcinoma (new lesion or
erroneous initial diagnosis?). Postoperative clinical and humoral outcome was
favorable in all situations excepting the case with carcinoma which died after
14 months.
Discussions and conclusions
Parathyroid adenomas produced evident systemic clinical features but not always
easy to diagnose. They benefit significantly from surgical treatment which is
considered the gold standard of respective lesions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP375
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP376
To be or not to be . male
Joel Capraro & Philipp Schutz
Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolisme,
Kantonsspital, Aarau, Switzerland.
Introduction
Pats with Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) have elevated morbidity and mortality due
to several reasons. Yet, there is no connection between KS and male-to-female
sex change.
Case
A 74-year-old man was sent for endocrine work-up prior to surgery due to
gynecomastia. The patient had lived as a man-to-woman transgender for many
years. He was told not to qualify for a transgender surgical approach when he was
55 years old. He took estradiol substitution for several years, but by age 60 after
developing recurrent severe pulmonary embolism he stopped substitution. After
that  he  lived
‘asexual’  and  bilateral,  non-painful  gynecomastia  developed.
Gonadal examination revealed small testes, bilateral Gynecomastia (Tanner IV)
and signs of chronic venous insufficiency. The biochemical analyses showed
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism with otherwise normal values. The molecular
analyses revealed a 47XXY Karyotype. Osteodensitometry showed low peak
bone mass. We started topical testosterone replacement and calcium/vitamin D3
substitution.
Discussion
KS affects about 1 in 660 men, but remains often undetected with only about 25%
of patients receiving the correct diagnosis. Age at diagnosis is around 35. The
phenotype is thought to be linked to non-inactivated genes from the extra
X-chromosome, but alternative mechanisms are possible.
The excess morbidity and mortality may be explained by endocrine dysfunction
and diseases of the cardiovascular and of respiratory systems. Only few studies
have examined the association of KS and transsexuality. One study found an
association of gender dysphoria with KS. Yet, no significant increase in KS was
reported in previous studies looking at men-to-female transgender populations.
Still, this hypothesis has to our knowledge not systematically been investigated to
make firm conclusions.
Thus, in patients with male-to-female sex change, further work-up towards KS
should only be envisaged if there is additional clinical suspicion - such as small
testes or hypergonadotropic hypogonadism as found in our case.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP376
EP377
Changing of thyroid status in an autoimmune polyglandular syndrome
type 2
Eda Demir Onal1, Nazli Pelin Aslan1, Merve Catak1, Ilknur Sener1,
Dilek Berker1 & Serdar Guler1,2
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara Numune Education
and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, 
¸ orum Hitit University, C¸ orum, Turkey.
Introduction
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 (APS2) is the most common form of
the polyglandular failure syndromes. Seventy-five percent of cases occur in
women.  Adrenal  insufficiency  is  the  principal  manifestation  occurs  with
autoimmune  thyroid  disease  or  type  I  diabetes  mellitus.  The  incidence  of
autoimmune thyroid diseases in APS2 is 70%; 30% Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 20%
non toxic goiter, 20% hypertyroidism is seen. We will discuss about a patient with
APS2, who previously had hypothyroidism, but now presenting with adrenal
crisis and hyperthyroidism.
Case
A 25-year-old male patient admitted to out-patient clinic for nausea, vomiting and
non  specific  abdominal  pain.  Biochemical  results  were  as  follow;  sodium
130 mmol/l (135-146), potassium 5.13 mmol/l (3.5-5.1), free T4 2.8 ng/dl (0.9-
1.7), free T3 3.97 pg/ml (2.5-3.9), TSH 0.02 mIU/ml (0.34-5.6). In his medical
history,  he  has  been  diagnosed  APS2
with  adrenal  insufficiency  and
hypothyroidism  for
8 years.  At  the  time  of  diagnosis  TSH,  ACTH  were
21.8 mIU/ml, and 2000 pg/ml respectively and anti TPO was positive. He was on
prednisolone
5 mg/day,  fludrocortisone
0.1 mg/day  and  levothyroxin
(LT4)
150 mcg/day treatment. We thought thyrotoxicosis factitia, so we stopped LT4
and increased prednisolone dose. After 2 weeks, despite cessation of L-thyroxin
treatment, thyrotoxicosis was persisted, anti TPO antibody and anti thyroglobulin
antibody were negative, but TSH receptor antibody (TRAbs) was high (315 U/l
(0-14))  and  thyroglobulin  was
90.4 ng/ml
(0-80).  Thyroid  ultrasonography
revealed  heterogeneous  parenchyma  with  minimal  increase  in  vascularity.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Thyroid  scintigraphy  with  Technetium  showed  non  homogeneous  increase
uptake. The patient diagnosed as Graves disease.
Conclusion
TRAbs is responsible for two distinct clinical syndromes. Stimulating antibodies
(TSAb)  cause  thyrotoxicosis  where  as  blocking  antibodies
(TBAb)  cause
hypothyroidism. Antibody switch can occur. The etiology of this process remains
unknown but hemodilution of TRAb titer can be one of the possible mechanisms.
Also  LT4  treatment  in  unusual  patients  can  induces  or  enhances  thyroid
autoantibody levels. The occurrence of ‘switching’ emphasizes the need for
careful patient monitoring and management.
TSH
fT4
fT3
AntiTPO
Time of diagnosis
21.63
1.13
2.98
52.4
(8 year before)
Initial result
0.02
2.80
3.97
5.8
2nd admission
0.08
3.87
5.63
-
(2 weeks later)
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP377
EP378
Safely operated two patients in pregnancy with primary
hyperparathyroidism
Neslihan Cuhaci1, Sevgul Faki1, Dilek Arpaci2, Nazmiye Dincer3,
Gurkan Dumlu4, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Endo-
crinology and Metabolism, Karaelmas University School of Medicine,
Zonguldak, Turkey;3Department of Pathology, Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;4Department of General Surgery,
Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT) during pregnancy is rare and associated
with increased morbidity for both mother and fetus. Maternal complications of
pHPT include nepfhrolithiasis, pancreatitis, cardiac arrhytmias, hypertension,
nausea and vomiting. pHPT is caused by a solitary adenoma in 85-90% of
patients, and the curative treatment is parathyroidectomy. Here, we presented two
women  who  have  diagnosed  pHPT  and  operated  without  complications  in
pregnancy.
Case 1
She was 20 years old and presented with abdominal pain at 8th weeks gestation.
Her laboratory tests were revealed 12.2 mg/dl Ca levels, 2 mg/dl Phosphorous (P)
levels and 136 pg/ml parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels and her urine Ca level
was 810 mg/24 h. Her neck ultrasonography (US) revealed a hypoechoic lesion
with 6.3!6.3!14.5 mm size consistent with parathyroid adenoma in the left
superior of the thyroid gland. No thyroid nodule was detected. Nepfhrolithiasis
was not determined.  The left superior  parathyroid gland was excised with
minimal invasive surgery in the 9th weeks of gestation and parathyroid adenoma
was excised.
Case 2
Thirty-eight years old woman who was 9th weeks gestation was referred to our
clinic for the high serum Ca levels. Her Ca level was 11.5 mg/dl, P level was
1.4 mg/dl, PTH level was 344 pg/ml. Her neck US revealed parathyroid adenoma
in the right inferior part of the thyroid gland 2!1!1 cm with size. Also she had a
nodule in the right thyroid gland. She had underwent right hemithyroidectomy
and parathyroidectomy in the second trimester and parathyroid adenoma was
excised.
Conclusion
Since  the  symptoms  are  often  non-specific  in  the  PHPT, it  can  be  easily
misdiagnosed  during  pregnancy.  Early  recognition  of  pHPT,  followed  by
appropriate  management  and  treatment  may  reduce  the  maternal  and  fetal
complications. Therefore pregnant women with biochemical hypercalcemia or
any clinical presentation associated with hypercalcemia must be evaluated for
pHPT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP378
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP379
Calcific uremic arteriolopathy (Calciphylaxis): case report
Lilit Egshatyan1,2 & Lyudmila Rozhinskaya2
1Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry named after A.I.
Evdokimov, Moscow, Russia;2FSI ‘Endocrinology Research Center’ of the
Ministry Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
The calcific uremic arteriolopathy (CUA) is one of the several types of extra-
osseous calcification that may occur in patients with end-stage renal disease
(ESRD). CUA is a serious disorder characterized by calcification of the arterioles
that leads to ischemia and subcutaneous necrosis. The pathogenesis is poorly
understood, and the optimal treatment is not known.
Case report
We present the case of a 64-year-old female with ESRD on hemodialysis since
2010, is hypertensive, had a heart attack in 2006. She was referred to our hospital
with extensive two ulcers on the left leg with necrotic eschars.
Laboratory investigations showed elevated levels of phosphorus 2.46 mmol/l,
calcium
2.73 mmol/l,
[Ca]![P]
6.7 mmol/l,  iPTH
2529 pg/ml.  Ultrasound
revealed multiple enlarged parathyroid glands, DEXA revealed osteopenia. The
clinical diagnosis was severe secondary hyperparathyroidism and CUA.
Considering the severity of CUA, was recommended a total parathyroidectomy.
However,  due  to  the  patient’s  cardiovascular  status,  there  were  certain
contraindications. Initially, we cancelled the warfarin, recommended a hypopho-
sphatic diet, analgesics, intravenous antibiotics, assessment by surgeons for
wound care. She started intensive dialysis on a daily: 3-h-sessions with low
calcium (1.25 mmol/l) dialysate for 2 weeks, later three times a week, followed by
24 mg of sodium thiosulfate intravenous administration at the end of every
session. She was also started on phosphate binders (sevelamer 2400 mg/day) and
calcimimetics (cinacalcet 30-60 mg/day) for better control.
Laboratory  investigations  were  done  during  the  treatment
- phosphorus
2.14 mmol/l, calcium 2.13 mmol/l, [Ca]![P] 4.55 mmol/l, iPTH 2086 pg/ml.
We added other phosphate binders Almagel for a short period. Six months later,
the first CUA lesion was healed, a year later - the second one.
Conclusion
Our case study shows that only a multi-interventional strategy is likely to be more
effective in treating CUA in patients on hemodialysis and with several secondary
hyperparathyroidisms.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP379
EP380
Unusual presentation of primary hyperparathyroidism with coexisted
thyroid carcinoma
Yalcin Basaran1, Semra Ince2, Engin Alagoz2, Coskun Meric1 &
Abdullah Taslipinar1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Gulhane School of
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Nuclear Medicine, Gulhane
School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Brown tumor is a rare benign bone lesion with incidence ranging from 1.5% in
primary  hyperparathyroidism  to
13%  in  secondary  hyperparathyroidism.
Common sites of involvement are pelvis, femur and ribs, but may appear in
any bone. Since the incidence of thyroid disease is higher among patients with
hyperparathyroidism  than  the  general  population,  these  lesions  must  be
distinguished from metastases from thyroid carcinoma.
We present a patient with a complex clinical picture of primary hyperparathyr-
oidism with multiple destructive skeletal lesions suspicious of bone metastases
and concomitant multifocal papillary thyroid carcinoma with a metastatic central
lymph node. To our knowledge, this is the second reported case of multiple brown
tumors caused by primary hyperparathyroidism and coexisting papillary thyroid
carcinoma.
Case report
A 38-year old male presented with progressively worsening right hip pain and
restricted motion. MRI revealed multiple lytic bone lesions suggestive of brown
tumors, but also suspicious for metastases. Biochemical tests were consistent with
primary  hyperparathyroidism. Neck ultrasound and  parathyroid  scintigraphy
revealed  a  single  parathyroid  adenoma  and  a  thyroid  nodule,  preoperative
cytology of which confirmed papillary thyroid carcinoma, as did the final surgical
specimen.  Biochemical  results,  regarding  hyperparathyroidism,  declined  to
normal levels and his complaints gradually decreased after surgery. Postoperative
whole body bone scintigraphy showed increased tracer uptakes at multiple sites.
However, post-RAI whole body scan and FDG PET/CT did not exhibit an
abnormal uptake throughout the skeletal system, which proved these osteolytic
lesions to be metabolically inactive.
Conclusion
Although the guidelines do not consider primary hyperthyroidism a risk factor for
thyroid carcinoma, several data suggest that this risk may be increased when
compared to the general population. As the concomitant thyroid carcinoma is not
uncommon among primary hyperparathyroidism patients, all patients who present
with a thyroid nodule should undergo FNAB, even if sonographic features are not
suspicious for malignancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP380
EP381
Undetectable HbA1C in a case of Thalassemia major: misuse of
diagnostics became a boon for the patient
Sa Das
Maulana Azad Medical College, Delhi, India.
Objective
To report a case of thalassemia major diagnosed per chance when investigated for
undetectable HbA1C.
Clinical Presentation
A 2-year-old male patient presented with fever since 3 days and moderate pallor.
His blood was sent to Biochemistry laboratory for the estimation of HbA1C. Later
on it was found that there was no indication for this test in this case. When
assayed, his haemoglobin (Hb)A1C was not detectable on a BioRad D10 HPLC
system.
Discussion
To find out the cause sample was analyzed for hemoglobin variants in the
extended mode which eluted with 95.2% HbF and 4.1% Hb A2 and 0.3% HbA.
The likely diagnosis was beta thalassemia major which was later confirmed by
hemogram and electrophoresis. Because there is very less (0.3%) HbA, ion
exchange HPLC will not detect glycated Hb in such individuals. There are several
other  factors  that affect  HbA1C  results  such  as homozygosity  for  HbE,
carbamylated Hb, any condition that decreases RBC survival.
Conclusion
A patient with undetectable HbA1C should be investigated for hemoglobinopathy
with very low HbA.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP381
EP382
Tuberculous lymphadenitis mimicking nodal metastasis in follicular
variant papillary thyroid carcinoma
Marc Gregory Yu & Jenny Maureen Atun
Philippine General Hospital, Manila, The Philippines.
Background
Tuberculous
(TB)  lymphadenitis  can  mimic  cervical  node  metastasis  from
papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) since the distribution and appearance of
affected lymph nodes is similar.
Case
A 50-year-old Filipino presented with a gradually-enlarging anterior neck mass,
with a solitary lymph node palpated at the left cervical area. The rest of the
history, physical examination and blood workup were unremarkable. A thyroid
ultrasound showed a 6.5!5!3 cm solid left thyroid mass plus a single 1.2!1!
0.5 cm cervical lymph node. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of the thyroid
mass  revealed  PTC.  The  patient  underwent  total  thyroidectomy  with  node
dissection where histopathology confirmed follicular variant (FV)-PTC. Lymph
node examination, however, revealed granulomatous inflammation with caseation
necrosis and Langhans giant cells consistent with TB. A chest X-ray plus two
acid-fast stained sputum samples were negative for concomitant pulmonary TB.
The patient underwent standard anti-mycobacterial therapy.
Discussion
Our patient had an enlarging anterior neck mass with an associated lymph node.
Due to the documented thyroid malignancy on FNAB plus lymph node proximity,
primary  consideration  for  lymphadenopathy  was  metastasis.  However,  the
distribution and sonographic appearance of lymph nodes is identical in TB
adenitis and cervical node metastasis. Since current guidelines do not recommend
routine preoperative FNAB of lymph nodes in PTC (which is staged clinically and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
radiologically), the diagnosis of TB lymphadenitis can be easily missed. In
retrospect, it could have identified TB preoperatively, leading to earlier anti-
mycobacterial therapy and avoiding neck dissection. This is the first documented
case in Southeast Asia, a high TB burden region. This is also the first report
involving FV-PTC, which has features between those of conventional PTC and
follicular thyroid carcinoma.
Conclusion
In  endemic  areas,  TB  should  be  a  differential  in  the  etiology  of  cervical
lymphadenopathy in PTC patients. Proper preoperative evaluation is important,
and guidelines may need to be revised.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP382
EP383
Hypertriglyceridemia induced pancreatitis
Natasha Shrikrishna, Stephen Wong, Andrew Maw, Mohammed Tahir &
Haimoud Choudry
Department of Endocrinology, Glan Clwd Hospital, North Wales, UK.
Introduction
Hypertriglyceridemia is rare but associated cause of pancreatitis and accounts for
10% of cases. Hypertriglyceridemia induced pancreatitis may occur secondary to
causes such as diabetes, pregnancy, hypothyroidism and obesity. Management of
hypertriglyceridemia includes a change in dietary intake as well as lipid lowering
agents, fenofibrates, statins and omega 3 fatty acids. To reduce the triglycerides
acutely, intravenous heparin and insulin have been used. In the case reported, the
use of intravenous insulin and heparin showed an 80% reduction in triglyceride
levels correlating with a significant improvement in clinical symptoms.
Case
A 51-year-old gentleman who was visiting North Wales was admitted under the
surgeons with a 1 day history of epigastric pain radiating to the back. His past
medical  history  included  hypertension,  non-insulin  dependent  diabetes  and
previous  pancreatitis.  Admission  bloods  revealed  a  crp
287 mg/l,  amylase
893 U/l, cholesterol 20.5 nmol/l, triglycerides of 87.2 nmol/l and a HbA1c 81. His
CT showed pancreatic oedema and fat stranding suggestive of acute pancreatitis.
Following this, an abdominal ultrasound showed no evidence of gallstones. There
was no family history of hyperlipidaemia and he was teetotal excluding these
causes, making hypertriglyceridemia the likely diagnosis. He was commenced on
fenofibrate, Omega 3 and atorvastatin. Due to his clinical symptoms and the
elevated levels of triglyceride, intravenous insulin with 10% dextrose and heparin
infusion 0.6 ml/h was started. Within 24 h, the triglyceride level had reduced to
25.8 nmol/l. His pain improved and his was discharged on subcutaneous Lantus
and Novorapid.
Conclusion
Hypertriglyceridemia is often associated with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus
and can precipitate an acute pancreatitis. The use of intravenous heparin and
insulin  stimulates  lipoprotein  lipase  activity  and  chylomicron  breakdown,
reducing triglyceride levels. Long-term treatment includes dietary modifications,
statins and better control of diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP383
EP384
Riedel’s sclerosing thyroiditis (RT): six case report
Marcela Jiménez1, Cristian Gottschalk1,2, Virginia Iturrieta2,
Pilar Schnneberger1,2, Gladys Larenas1,2 & Fernando Jélvez2
1German Clinic, Temuco, Araucanía, Chile;2Hernán Henriquez Aravena
Hospital, Temuco, Araucanía, Chile.
Case 1
78-years-old female with progressive increase volume in cervical area with
dysphagia, drowsiness, slowness, dispnea, and change in of voice. Hypothyroid-
ism and a TPO O1000 UI/ml. Thyroid ultrasound: heterogeneous mass in the left
lobe, vascularized with ipsilateral multiple lymph nodes of 0.8!0.6 cm. PAAF:
Bethesda 1. Four weeks later course with major obstruction of the upper airway.
In  ER  a  near-total  thyroidectomy  is  performed.  Postoperatory  without
complications. Biopsy compatible with RT.
Case 2
58-years-old male. 15 weeks of dysphonia. Euthyroid. Studies identified left
paralysis of the vocal cords. CT: node with an intrathoracic extension of the
thyroid’s left lobe. The cervical ultrasound revealed a suspicious thyroid nodule
of 5!7 cm. A bilateral thyroidectomy was performed. Biopsy compatible with
RT. Dysphonia continued after the late post operatory.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Case 3
85 years old female with hypothyroidism. Logic dysphagia for 15 days, dyspnea
and increment in cervical volume. 2 PAAF obtaining Bethesda 3. The CT
presented a 7 cm mass with and infiltration to the adjacent tissues in the thyroid’s
left lobe and left cervical adenopathies. She was admitted to perform a study and a
corticotherapy. The mass diminished its size softening the obstructive symptoms.
Biopsy showed RT treated with corticoids
Case 4
58-year-old female. Multinodular bocio. During surgery it was identified a strong
mass very attached to adjacent tissues. Suspecting RT, the total thyroidectomy
was finished. Biopsy confirmed RT. Postoperatory had no complications.
Case 5
Female 72 years  old  with increase nodular  volume  in  thyroid and  airway
compromised. Byopse thyroiditis sclerosing and anaplastic carcinoma. Patient
died for acute respiratory insuficience without therapy. Case 6: Male 77 years old
with giant bocio with 30 years of evolution. Total Thyroidectomy: Riedel’s
thyroiditis and papilar carcinoma. Complementary therapy with radiotherapy and
radioactive yodo in course.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP384
EP385
Thyroid, the Heart and Amiodarone
Catarina Ivo, João Silva, Hélder Simo˜es, José Monge, Carlos Lopes,
Mafalda Marcelino & João Jácome de Castro
Hospital das Forc¸as Armadas, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction
The  hyperthyroidism  is  a  risk  factor  for  tachyarrhythmia  and  dilated
cardiomyopathy. Amiodarone is an effective antiarrhythmic medication, however
if coexisting thyroid pathology complicates the treatment of thyroid dysfunction.
It presents a case of Graves’ disease (GD) of long evolution, which illustrates the
complexity of these associations. Clinical case: man, 44 years old, smoker, history
of acute myocardial infarction and GD diagnosed at age 28. Has made treatment
with propylthiouracil during 3 years, having abandoned the medical follow-up.
Admitted for urgent care by signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism and heart
failure
(class  IV  NYHA),  with
1 month  of  evolution.  He  presented  with
tachyarrhythmia, tremor, visible and palpable diffuse goiter, slight active Graves’
ophthalmopathy. Eletrocardiogram: ventricular tachycardia alternating with sinus
rhythm, left anterior hemiblock, repolarization changes suggesting ischemia.
Echocardiography:dilated  ischemic  heart  disease,  LVEF-32%,  suspicion  of
intracavitary  thrombus  in  the  left  ventricle.  Laboratory  tests:  TSH!0.003
mU/ml; fT4  2.18 ng/dl (0.7-1.48); fT3  6.06 pg/ml (1.71-3.71); anti-TPO 514
UI/ml; anti-Tg 18.9 UI/ml; TRAb 12.4 UI/ml; pro-BNP 2146 pg/ml; troponina
33.8 ng/l
(!15).  Cervical  ultrasound  revealed  GD.  Established  therapy  in
hospital:amiodarone, rivaroxaban, atorvastatin, furosemide, ramipril, spironolac-
tone, bisoprolol, thiamazol and prednisolone. There was clinical improvement
and normalization of thyroid function. It was decided to thyroidectomy about 2
weeks  after  the  episode.  After
6
months:  Echocardiography:  LVEF-55%,
segmental hypokinesia; Coronary angiography: LVEF 60%, occluded coronary
proximal left anterior descending, filling by collateral of the right coronary artery.
Performed coronary artery bypass surgery.
Discussion
The effect of hyperthyroidism in the myocardium begins to be better understood.
The euthyroid state allows the improvement/reversion of cardiac abnormalities. The
amiodarone is effective, even in the context of thyrotoxicosis, contributing to
normalization of thyroid hormones (Wolf-Chaikoff effect). However, in the long
term may worsen the hyperthyroidism by escape of this mechanism. Thus,
thyroidectomy in the short term is the best definitive treatment of the GD, being
carried out without major surgical risk, when normalized thyroid hormones.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP385
EP386
A rare variant of hyperthyroidism: unilateral Graves’ disease
Ferhat Deniz1, Kamil Baskoy1, Seyid Ahmet Ay1, Muammer Urhan2 &
Arif Yonem1
1Endocrinology and Metabolism, Haydarpasa Training Hospital, Gulhane
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Nuclear Medicine, Haydarpasa
Training Hospital, Gulhane School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Despite the fact that Graves’ disease (GD) almost always presents as a diffuse
hyperfunctioning goiter involving both lobes of the thyroid gland, it may rarely
reveal at only unilateral lobe with bilobar thyroid gland. We herein present a case
of unilateral GD involving the right thyroid lobe of a bilobar gland.
Case report
A 42-year-old woman presented with symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism;
thyrotropin
(TSH)  was  undetectable,  while  free  thyroxine
(fT4)  and  free
triiodothyronine (fT3) were increased. A color Doppler ultrasonography of the
thyroid gland was revealed a nonhomogeneous, hypervascular and enlarged right
lobe compared to the hypovascular and homogeny left thyroid lobe. Thyroid
scintigraphy with Tc99m showed that uptake of the radioisotope was uniformly
and unilaterally increased in the right lobe, with no uptake in the left lobe of
thyroid  gland,  which  was  compatible  with  unilateral  GD.  Finally,  thyroid
autoantibodies were positive. Unilateral Graves’ disease was diagnosed, and
treated with methimazole and propronalol. In the nineth month, the complaints
and laboratory of the patient were improved by antithyroid therapy, and the
treatment was gradually discontiuned. Two months later, because her complains
and laboratory were consistent with overt thyrotoxicosis, the antithyroid therapy
was given again. As a conclusion, after the last medical treatment, she will be
referred for radioiodine ablation therapy due to the recurrent disease.
Conclusion
This thyrotoxic patient has positive thyroid autoantibody, hypervascular and
heterogeneously enlarged right thyroid lobe on ultrasonography (compared to the
hypovascular and homogeny left thyroid lobe),and the uniformly distributed,in-
creased Tc99m uptake in the right thyroid lobe pointing to existence of unilateral
GD as the diagnosis. Unilateral GD is a rare condition and its pathophysiology has
not been clearly elucidated. In conclusion, clinicians should be aware that Graves’
disease can present with unilateral involvement of the thyroid gland.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP386
EP387
4 years between diagnosis and insulin therapy in a case of slow onset
type 1 diabetes mellitus
Daniel-Tudor Cosma1, Alina Cristina Silaghi2, Horatiu Silaghi3 &
Ioan Andrei veresiu1
1Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases Clinical Center, Cluj-Napoca,
Cluj County, Romania;2Endocrinology Clinic, Emergency Clinical County
Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Cluj County, Romania;3The Vth Department of
Surgery, ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ Univeristy of Medecine and Pharmacy,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is the most common form of diabetes in
children and young adults. Though T1DM often presents in an acute manner, it
may be preceded by a prodromal period, often extending over years.
Case report
A 19-year-old male, diagnosed with T1DM at the age of 15, with no insulin
treatment, was admitted to our department for high glycemic value (G) of
365 mg/dl  on  a  routine  exam  at  his  GP.  At  diagnosis  the  patient  was
asymptomatic, with a jeun GZ149-159 mg/dl, 2 h-OGTTZ386 mg/dl, A1cZ
5.2%, high GAD antibodies, C peptide and insulin levels in the normal lower
range. The lack of family history and the normal G of his parents excluded a
MODY form and the absence of obesity or overweight excluded T2DM. His past
medical history was consistent with: left popliteal deep vein thrombosis in the
context of a moderate (27%) deficit of S protein, moderate thinness, mild
dyslipidemia and mild normocytic, normochromic anemia. Six months after the
diabetes diagnosis and on a diet the A1cZ7.28%. In our department, labs exams
revealed:  GZ285 mg/dl,  mild  hypokalemia,  mild  dyslipidemia,  ketonuria
(150 mg/dl), significant glycosuria (1 g/dl) and the A1c O14% was consistent
with a sever glycemic imbalance in the last 3 months. A basal bolus regimen with
glargine and lispro insulin was started, adjusted according to the glycemic values
and carbs ingestion. The screening for other autoimmune diseases was performed
revealing only slightly elevated circulating immune complexes.
Discussions
This case illustrates the complexity of diagnosis in a case of slow onset T1DM.
The clinical judgment and immunological labs exams are essential for a correct
diagnosis. From our knowledge, this case presents the largest period from the
diagnosis of T1DM and initiation of the insulin therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP387
EP388
Acute mania after levothyroxine replacement for hypothyroid-induced
heart block
Marc Gregory Yu, Karen Marie Flores & Iris Thiele Isip-Tan
Philippine General Hospital, Manila, The Philippines.
Background
While psychiatric disturbances are well-documented manifestations of hypothyroid-
ism, initiation of levothyroxine (LT4) therapy can also present in a similar manner.
Case
A 34-year-old Filipino with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis consulted for signs and
symptoms of hypothyroidism. Thyroid function tests were severely deranged, and
an electrocardiogram revealed high grade atrioventricular block. Twenty-four hours
after a full replacement dose of LT4, he developed manic symptoms, which were
addressed with sedatives and neuroleptics with gradual restoration of euthymia the
following day. He remained stable throughout his admission with no relapse of
psychiatric symptoms. A comprehensive workup did not reveal other etiologies for
the mania or the heart block. We ultimately attributed the mania to LT4, and the
heart block to hypothyroidism.
Discussion
The temporal relationship between LT4 intake and onset of mania, plus the lack of
other findings on workup, suggest that the mania was probably LT4-induced. The
pathophysiology is thought to be related to abrupt augmentation of catecholamine
receptor sensitivity. In the few available case reports, manic symptoms were found
to manifest in as short as one day after LT4 initiation and can likewise resolve the
following day. While most cases occurred at higher LT4 doses, they can also occur
at low doses and with gradual dose titration. We gave the full replacement dose for
our patient due to his young age, profound hypothyroidism complicated by heart
block, and absence of co-morbidities. Our case is significant in the sense that it is
the  first  report  involving  a  double-edged  sword:  dealing  with  psychiatric
disturbances from LT4  administration at the same needing to urgently correct
severe hypothyroidism with cardiac complications.
Conclusion
Although  rare,  LT4
therapy  can  present  with  psychiatric  disturbances.  An
exhaustive workup is needed to rule out other diagnoses, and the pros and cons
of treatment should be weighed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP388
EP389
Graves’ orbitopathy- When the going gets tough. the tough get going?
Alexandra Nila1, Minodora Betivoiu1, Cristina Serbanescu1,
Sorina Martin1,2 & Simona Fica1,2
1Endocrinology Department, Elias Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;
2Endocrinology Department, Carol Davila University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Thyroid disorders are common within the elderly population and are particularly
challenging to diagnose and treat due to the presence of a wide variety of
comorbidities. Graves’ ophtalmopathy remains a therapeutic predicament despite
all progress made in understanding its pathogenesis, especially in the elderly
population with severe presentation.
Case presentation
We present the case of a 71-years-old female patient who was admitted in our
clinic for diplopia, decreased visual acuity, visual field amputation, dysphonia and
thyroid enlargement. She was diagnosed with Graves’ disease 2 years prior her
admission and had been on block and replace treatment ever since. Her medical
history includes: class III NYHA heart failure, metallic mitral valve replacement,
permanent atrial fibrillation, severe tricuspid regurgitation and severe secondary
pulmonary hypertension. Clinical examination revealed bilateral exophthalmia,
eyelid  edema,  conjunctival  hyperemia,  convergent  strabismus  and  a  large,
compressive  goiter.  Lab  tests  revealed  iatrogenic  hypothyroidism
(TSHZ
36.7 uIU/ml,  FT4!0.30 ng/ml,  TT3-Z104.3 ng/dl).The  orbit  CT  scan  and
ophtalmological examination discovered bilateral hypertrophy of orbital rectus
muscles, disthyroid optic neuropathy, paracentral scotoma, very low motility and
corneal edema in both eyes. The cardiologic examination pointed out her high
surgical risk considering the heart failure and severe pulmonary hypertension.
The  Methimazol  dose  was  adjusted  and  over  the  next
4
months,  under
multidisciplinary surveillance, our patient received three courses of pulse therapy
with low-dose methylprednisolone (375 mg over two courses and 250 mg/one
course, cumulative dose 1 g), well tolerated, with slight improvement in visual
field defects and visual acuity and amelioration of symptoms. Considering the
severe ophtalmopathy and the cardiac pathology, the patient continues treatment
with Methimazol.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Treating Graves’ disease/orbitopathy can be challenging when having a severe
presentation, especially in the geriatric population where associated pathologies,
concomitant medication, treatment tolerance must be considered.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP389
EP390
A rare case: co-occurrence of aplastic anemia and high-risk thyroid
papillary carcinoma
Semra Ayturk1, Mehmet Celik1, Buket Yilmaz Bulbul1, Nuray Can2,
Ebru Tastekin2, Atakan Sezer3, Funda Ustun4, Muhammet Maden5,
Gulsum Emel Pamuk5 & Sibel Guldiken1
1Trakya University Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolizm, Edirne, Turkey;2Trakya University Medical Faculty,
Department of Pathology, Edirne, Turkey;3Trakya University Medical
Faculty, Department of Surgery, Edirne, Turkey;4Trakya University
Medical Faculty, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Edirne, Turkey;5Trakya
University Medical Faculty, Department of Hematology, Edirne, Turkey.
Aplastic anemia is an idiopathic/idiosyncratic or hereditary bone marrow failure
characterized by hypocellular bone marrow and pancytopenia without abnormal
infiltration  and  increase  in  reticulin  fibers.  Papillary  thyroid  cancer
(PTC)
constitutes 85% of all differentiated thyroid cancers. There is no data on the
application  of  radioactive  iodine  treatment  for  the  treatment  of  high-risk
differentiated thyroid carcinoma detected in the subjects with aplastic anemia.
A-60-year old male patient was referred to our clinic for pancytopenia detected on
the examinations performed for ecchymosis on the skin. Physical examination
revealed ecchymosis on the skin and cervical lymphadenopathies. Leukocyte:
2170 ml (4230-9000), hemoglobin: 6.4 gr/dl (13.7-17.5), thrombocyte: 12 000 ml
(150 000-400 000). Bone marrow aspiration biopsy demonstrated hypocellular
bone marrow. The patient with the initial diagnosis of aplastic anemia underwent
neck US examination, which revealed a 28!30!32 mm sized, expansile and
heterogeneous nodule with lobulated margins, microcalcification and intranod-
ular vascularisation on the upper part of the left thyroid lobe and multiple
pathologic lymph nodes on the cervical region. The patient was in euthyroid state.
PTC metastasis was detected on lymph node biopsy and the patient underwent
total thyroidectomy and central and lateral lymph node dissection. Histopatho-
logic  examination  revealed  PTC  tall  cell  variant,  tumor  size  of
3 cm,
extrathyroidal invasion and carcinoma metastasis in seven of 25 lymph nodes.
The patient was diagnosed with aplastic anemia and high grade PTC; radioactive
iodine treatment was delayed until the 6th month of aplastic anemia treatment
after  hematology  and  nuclear  medicine  department  consultations  and  TSH
suppression treatment was commenced.
In conclusion, high dose radioactive iodine treatment is known to cause bone
marrow suppression. As in our case, since radioactive iodine treatment may
deteriorate pancytopenia in the patients with severe aplastic anemia, multi-
disciplinary approach is required in the management of such particular cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP390
EP391
The importance of an intraoperative revision of all parathyroid glands,
which may reveal additional pathologic changes and lead to an
operation extension
Monika Ny´ vltová, Karolína Drbalová, Petr Krejcí & Miroslav Zavoral
Military University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
We present two case reports of patients who were diagnosed with hyperpar-
athyroidism based on a parathyroid gland adenoma (PTA). The pathological
parathyroid tissue was precisely localised by ultrasonography and scintigraphy
before the surgery. In both cases all four parathyroid glands were revised by the
surgeon resulting in an operation extension. Another parathyroid gland was
removed and histologically confirmed as PTA. This surgeon’s approach was
beneficial for the patient and the operation procedure was therefore curative.
The first patient (male, 72 years old) was diagnosed with hyperparathyroidism in
10/2012. Ultrasonography showed a goiter with a solitary cystic nodule in the
right lobe. Scintigraphy did not show any hyperfunctional parathyroid tissue. In
the  cystic  fluid  from  the  nodule  we  measured  very  high  concentration  of
parathormone. Next sonography after the evacuation of the cystic fluid showed a
typical hypoechoic right inferior PTA. The patient was recommended for a total
thyroidectomy and extirpation of the right inferior PTA. After the operation in
2/2014 the pathologist surprisingly did not describe any parathyroid tissue within
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
or next to the right lobe of the thyroid gland. Moreover, the surgeon found left
superior PTA that was confirmed histologically!
The second patient (female, 77 years old) was diagnosed with a hyperparathyr-
oidism in 6/2015. Ultrasonography showed two suspicious hypoechoic nodules
under the left lobe. Scintigraphy revealed two PTAs - right inferior and left
superior.  The  patient  was  recommended  for  a  surgery  too.  The  surgeon
unsurprisingly removed left superior PTA, but he had doubts about the right
inferior parathyroid gland that was only partially respected and histologically
confirmed as a normal tissue! Moreover, the surgeon removed right superior PTA
(confirmed histologically)!
Those two case reports highlight the important role of an intraoperative revision
of all parathyroid glands.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP391
EP392
Hypothyroidism as a cause of precocious puberty
Mikele Torino Paletti1, Angela Cristina Menegato Miranda1,
Bruna Lopes Sanseverino1, Eliane Lopes Miranda Cosson1, Fabiana
Sayuri Takahashi1, Flavia Renata de Sousa Caldeira1, Leonardo César
Simo˜es Faria1, Martin Andres Amicone1, Nícia Das Mercês Maia Aguiar1,
Tânia Mara Pinheiro Alves Souza1, Thatiani Coelho Placco Codonho1,
Hesio José de Mora dos Anjos1, Julimar Benedita Gomes Oliveira1, Odon
Paes Barbosa Junior1, Francilene Silva1, Ana Luisa de Jesus1, Denise Rosso
Tenorio Wanderley Rocha1 & Alberto Krayyem Arbex1,2
1IPEMED Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil;2Fiocruz Brazil - Fundacao
Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Introduction
Hypothyroidism is a rare cause of early puberty in childhood. It reduces the
growth rate by decreasing the amplitude of GH pulses. We report the case of a
child who  developed  precocious puberty and  reduced  speed  consequent  to
hypothyroidism growth. The treatment of thyroid disease with levothyroxine led
to regression of pubertal development and resumption of growth.
Methods
A.J.S., female, 1 year and 5 months of age at first consultation. She to came the
endocrinology  service  in  March
2011,  complaining  about  bilateral  breast
enlargement since birth. Her mother reported pregnancy without complications.
Cesarean delivery, birth weight and height were 48 cm and 3.3 kg, respectively.
Breast feeding up to 10 months; no use of medications. Physical examination in
2011 showed Tanner M2 P1, genitals and thyroid gland without changes on
physical examination, 11 kg weight and 80 cm in height (50-75 percentile).
Results
In 2011, TSH was 7.48 U/l, LH: !0.71 U/l, FSH: 4.1 U/l, Estradiol: 15 U/l.
Breast ultrasound showed stromal gland stimulation. Pelvic US showed no
change. Bone age was 18 months to 2 years. The conduct was to prescribe
levothyroxine 50 mg/day. When she became 2 years and 6 months old she had a
Tanner M2P2. TSH: 1.69 U/l, Free T4: 33.6 U/l. Growth rate of 11.5 cm/year. She
came back in January 2013, with Tanner M2P2. On April 2014: Weight: 17.6 kg
and Height: 105 cm, Tanner M2P1. Bone age: 2 years old. Growth rate 04/2014 to
04/2015:
8.5 cm/year,  the  patient  was  euthyroid.  January
2016
she  was
asymptomatic,  in  use  of  levothyroxine
75 mg/day,  Tanner:  M2P1,  Height:
116 cm, Weight: 23.8 kg.
Discussion
Treatment of the thyroid disease led to regression of the pubertal development and
reduction of growth velocity as a consequence of primary hypothyroidism.
Thyroid dysfunction may be associated with Precocious puberty in the clinical
practice, demanding a specific clinical approach.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP392
EP393
Diaphoresis and palpitation like first syntoms a tumor
Esther Delgado García1, Cristina Tejera Perez2, Francisco Miguel Morales
Perez1, Claudia Garcia Lobato1, Beatriz Glavan Diaz1,
Rafael Hernandez Lavado1, Jose Diaz Perez de Madrid1 &
Pilar Isabel Beato Vibora1
1Hospital Infanta Cristina, Badajoz, Spain;2Hospital Universitario Ferrol,
Ferrol, Spain.
Introduction
Hypoglucemia is one of the most common endocrine symptoms and supposes a
challenging in endocrine clinical practise. In most cases, are produced in relation
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
with diabetes (drugs and diet). In other cases, there was an endogenous insulin
production which cause the symptoms.
Clinical report
A 58-year-old was attended in the Emergency Department with episodes of
lightheadedness, diaphoresis, palpitation, tremulousness for month duration. In
that moment, her glucose level was 45 mg/dl. The patient was admitted in
Endocrinology Unit for study. The patient had obesity, hypertension in treatment
with three drugs, hypercholesterolemia, aortic root dilatation and sleep apnea
syndrome. The most episodes were in the evening and during prolonged fasting.
The symptoms were relieved with eating something (not special food) or taking
glucose water orally. She had no family history of diabetes. Physical examination
revealed an obese woman weighing 118 kg and with a body mass index of
43.7 kg/m2.  Hypoglycemic  symptoms  occurred  by  Prolonged  fast  test,
simultaneously  taken  blood  showed  the  glucose
49 mg/dl,  plasma  insulin
66.1 mUI/ml,  insulin/glucose  ratio  was
1.34
with  hypophysis-hypophysial
hormonal analysis normal. CT scan showed at pancreas a nodular lesion of
35!27 mm in uncinate process, suggestive for insulinoma.
She was treated with 60 mg of oral prednisone and 100 mg diazoxide until
surgery. A lesion resection was performed. The glucose and insulin levels were
normal at postoperative period.
Conclusions
Insulinomas are rare pancreatic is let cell tumors with an incidence of 1 case per
250 000 person-years. Most insulinomas are sporadic and benign. The diagnosis
of insulinoma is confirmed by high serum insulin concentrations during episode
of hypoglucemia and surgical excision is the treatment of choice and is curative in
most cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP393
EP394
Subacute thyroiditis during pregnancy
Canan Yıldız1 & Mustafa Altay2
1Deparment of Internal Medicine, Keçioren Education and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Deparment of Endocrinology, Keçioren
Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Hyperthyroidism during pregnancy is a rare condition and occurs in 0.1-0.4% of
all  pregnancies.  Graves’  Disease  and  transient  gestational  thyrotoxicosis
constitute the majority of emerging thyrotoxicosis during pregnancy. Subacute
thyroiditis (SAT) may also cause temporary hyperthyroidism.
Case report
A thirty-three-year-old, 13-week pregnant patients was admitted with fatigue,
pain and swelling in thyroid lodge. Thyroid function tests performed two months
ago were found to be in the normal range. On physical examination of the patient,
there was no symptoms other than pain in the neck, and bilateral thyroid gland
was large with tenderness. In the laboratory tests carried out at the patient’s
admission, TSH was: 0.17 (0.4-4.2) mı/ ml, fT4: 2.67 (0.65-1.7) ng/dl, fT3: 4.58
(2.5-3.9)  pg/ml  C-reactive  protein
(CRP):
5.27
(0-0.8)  mg/dl,  erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR): 41 mm/h, anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO): 3.54 (1-
16) IU/ml, thyroid receptor antibody (TRAb): 3.88 (0-14) U/l, anti-thyroglobulin
(anti-TG): 1715 (5-100) IU/ml, WBC: 9800 ml In the thyroid USG both lobes
were large and parenchymal blood flow was not increased. There was a distinct
view of bilateral subacute thyroiditis and reactive bilateral cervical lymphadeno-
pathy. Paracetamol 3!500 mg was started because of the pain. The patient’s pain
was significantly decreased 3 days later. Clinical and laboratory findings in
patient was compatible with SAT. 10 days later, pain and tenderness in the thyroid
lodge  was  completely  relieved.  After  repeated  laboratory  tests,
50 mcg  of
levothyroxine was instituted. With levothyroxine  treatment,  patient did  not
experience any problem during pregnancy and when she was 38 weeks and 2 days
pregnant, vaginally delivered a healthy baby boy who weighs 3740 gr.
Conclusion
When determining the differential diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy,
subacute thyroiditis should also be considered and detailed history and physical
examination of the thyroid should not be neglected.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP394
EP395
A rare presentation of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: spontaneous
intrathyroidal hemorrhage
Sibel Guldiken1, Mehmet Celik1, Semra Ayturk1, Buket Yilmaz Bulbul1,
Ebru Tastekin2, Nuray Can2, Atakan Sezer3 & Funda Ustun4
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolizm, Trakya University Medical
Faculty, Edirne, Turkey;2Department of Pathology, Trakya University
Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey;3Department of Surgery, Trakya
University Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey;4Department of Nuclear
Medicine, Trakya University Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey.
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is one of the most aggressive and lethal
human malignancies. The median survival time following diagnosis is typically
6 months or less. Spontaneous thyroid haemorrhage may occur following an
increase in venous pressure after Valsalva manoeuvre, hemodialysis session along
with the use of heparin, trauma and in the patients with hypertension, especially in
those with coagulopathy. Intrathyroidal hemorrhage may develop from a previous
silent lesion as in the case of an ATC.
A 67-year-old woman presented with dysphagia and dyspnea of 1-month duration
and a rapidly enlarging neck mass for the past 3 weeks. She had been suffering
from toxic multinodular goiter disease. She was on methimazole 20 mg/day and
propranolol 20 mg twice daily treatment for the last month. Physical examination
revealed  a  large,  ecchymosed  and  mildy  tender  thyroid  mass.  On  neck
ultrasonography, thyroid gland was slightly larger than normal with hetero-
geneous parenchyma and there were multiple, heterogeneous and hypoechoic
nodules, the biggest one was being 28!32!35 mm in size in the left thyroid
lobe. Neck tomography revealed a 183!68!70 mm sized malignant tumoral
lesion? of left thyroid lobe, placing trachea anteriorly and to the right side,
infiltrating esophagus and retrosternal area and having hemorrhagic component.
In  addition,
1.5 cm  sized  multiple  necrotic  lymph  nodes  were  visible.
Laryngoscopic examination demonstrated externally compressed trachea with
normal mucosa, the esophagus was also narrowed by external compression on
esophagoscopy. Blood coagulation profile was normal. Tru-cut biopsy of left
thyroid lobe detected anaplastic carcinoma with rhabdoid giant cell formation.
Since emergency surgical operation was not required, the patient was referred to
the department of oncology for chemo-radiotherapy.
In conclusion, although it is rare, anaplastic carcinoma should be considered in
the patients presenting with spontaneous intrathyroidal hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP395
EP396
Untreated hypothyreoidismus can lead to serious consequences in all
organ systems
Olivera Boskovic, Teodora Vujovic & Dragana Lutovac
Clinical Center of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro.
Aim
To  present  a  patient  with  all  manifestations  of  long-term  unsubstituted
hypothyroidism-from alopecia to myxedema megacolon.
Case
sixty-one-old year women was admitted in ICU due to disturbance of consciousness,
respiratory failure and electrolyte imbalance. Sopor, expressed alopecia, dry, flaky,
pail skin, generalized edema, lung stasis and pericardial friction. A laboratory
parameters  pointed  to  the  presence  of  normocytic  normochromic  anemia,
hyponatremia, acidosis and hypoxia, and hormonal analyzes expressed in primary
hypothyroidism. In the immunological findings of elevated double-spiral DNA.
Visualization techniques proved the presence of pleural effusion and atelectasis of
the left lung parenchyma, the presence of pericardial effusion, a small amount of fluid
in the abdomen, as well as expressed enlarged and filled with air both flexure and
transverse section of the colon, and multi chemical changes in white matter of the
brain. The patient was intubated, applied mechanical ventilation. We started
substitution with levothyroxine, diuretics, corticosteroids and other sympthomatic
therapy.  She  was  treated  with  enema  various  times,  repeatedly  performed
bronchoscopy treatment on four occasions, and tracheotomy was made. The
treatment led to an improvement in the sense of lowering the parameters of
inflammation, improving the acid-base parameters and reexpansion of the lung
parenchyma, and general condition of the patient was getting better.
Discussion and conclusion
The lack of treatment of hypothyroidism can lead to serious consequences in all
organ systems. Since the autoimmune process has never antigen completely
sensitive, there is a possibility of affection more target tissues in autoimmune
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
process and mutually overlapping signs and symptoms of various autoimmune
diseases. Elevated levels of double-spiral DNA in combination with the presence of
and criteria indicate the presence of lupus disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP396
EP396B
Unusual ectopic thyroid
Lina Abdul Samad
King Fahd Military Medical Complex, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
Case
A 34-year-old, Saudi male, known case of hypothyroidism with coarse (potato)
voice, referred for isotopic thyroid scan. After withdrawing the Eltroxin for one
month, thyroid scan was done and showed abnormal uptake rounded in shape and
appears  bi-lobar,  seen  highly  in  the  neck,  at  the  midline,  between  both
submandibular glands. No evidence of any uptake at the normal anatomical
position of the thyroid gland. Ultrasound of the neck was done and showed large
submental mass. Patient was referred for CT scan with contrast of the neck that
showed large midline suprahyoid mass lesion, mildly calcified measuring 70!
54!50 mm, that showing heterogeneous enhancement post contrast. An ectopic
goitrogenic lingual thyroid tissue was the first impression diagnosis; underlying
malignancy cannot be totally excluded. Patient was referred for MRI of the neck
four months later by his treating physician that showed no interval changes
regarding the size and extension of the mass.
Unfortunately, there was no feedback from the treating physician. Only lately
I was informed that the patient was operated and the large lingual mass was
excised, and the pathology result came to be an abnormal thyroid tissue. Patient
recovered his voice and obviously he is under Eltroxin treatment.
Discussion
The thyroid scan plays most important role in diagnosing thyroid ectopy.
Other X-ray modalities are contributing and mandatory in some cases.
Lingual thyroid is the most frequent location of ectopy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP396B
Developmental endocrinology
EP397
Cross-sex hormone therapy affects body fat distribution in transgender
persons
Maartje Klaver1, Marieke Dekker1, Thomas Schreiner3, Alessandra Fisher4,
Guy T’sjoen2 & Martin den Heijer1
1
Department of Endocrinology and Center of Expertise on Gender
Dysphoria, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
2Department of Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium;
3Department of Endocrinology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;
4Sexual Medicine and Andrology Unit, Department of Experimental,
Clinical and Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
Introduction
Fat distribution is an important secondary sex characteristic, which is generally
peripherally or pear-shaped (gynoid) in females and centrally or apple-shaped
(android) in males. Total body fat increases in male-to-females (MtFs) and
decreases in female-to-males (FtMs) during cross-sex hormone therapy (CSHT),
approaching body fat amounts of the desired sex. However, changes in android or
gynoid  fat  distribution  might  be  a  better  measure  for  masculinization  and
feminization than changes in amount of body fat per se. As yet, the exact effects of
CSHT on fat in the android- and gynoid region are unknown.
Aim
To investigate the effects of CSHT on android fat, gynoid fat and waist-hip ratio
(WHR) in MtFs and FtMs.
Methods
This prospective study (ENIGI) included 108 patients that completed one year of
CSHT. 51 MtFs received anti-androgens and estrogen therapy, while 57 FtMs
were  treated  with  androgens.  At  the  start  and  after  one  year  of  CSHT
anthropometrics were measured and a whole body DEXA was obtained, in
which android fat and gynoid fat were measured.
Results
In MtFs an increase of gynoid fat was seen of C0.8 kg (0.6;1.1) from 3.3 to
4.1 kg. Android fat tended to increase with 0.1 kg (K0.02;0.3) from 1.6 to 1.7 kg,
but WHR decreased with K0.02 (K0.001;K0.01) from 0.86 to 0.84. In FtMs,
gynoid fat decreased with K0.6 kg (K0.4;K0.8) from 4.8 to 4.2 kg. Android fat
and the WHR tended to increase with respectively 0.05 kg (K0.06;0.2) from 1.89
to 1.94 kg and 0.02 (K0.01;0.04) from 0.81 to 0.83.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Fat distribution in MtFs changed towards a more female-like fat distribution with
an increase in gynoid fat and a trend towards a decreasing WHR. The opposite
tended to occur in FtMs with a decrease in gynoid fat and an increase in android
fat and WHR.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP397
EP398
Evaluation of the series of adults with inborn metabolic diseases
followed in endocrinology in Andalusia (Spain)
Montserrat Gonzalo Marin1, Inmaculada Gonzalez Molero1, Eva
Venegas Moreno2, Elena Dios Fuentes2, Javier Blasco Alonso3, Maria
Bueno Delgado4, Juliana Serrano Nieto3, Carlos Sierra Salinas3, Gabriel
Olveira Fuster1, Francisco Tinahones Maduen˜o1 & Alfonso Soto Moreno2
1Endocrinology and Nutrition, Regional University Hospital, Malaga,
Spain;2Endocrinology and Nutrition, Virgen del Rocío Hospital, Virgen
Macarena Hospital, Seville, Spain;3Service Paediatric Gastroenterology,
Materno-Infantil Hospital, Malaga, Spain;4Pediatrics, Virgen del Rocío
Hospital, Seville, Spain.
Objectives
The transition from the paediatric age to the adult is a particularly vulnerable
period in patients with metabolic congenital diseases (mcd). In andalusia two
adults’ units exist (seville and malaga) for the follow-up of these patients. Our aim
in this study was to evaluate the current series of attended patients.
Material and methods
We evaluated all patients transferred to the adult units since 2008. The clinical
records were analyzed retrospectively.
Results
At present 149 adults with mcd (98 seville and 51 malaga) are evaluated. Aged
(14-65) 71 women and 72 men. 92 phenylketonura (pku) (70 in seville and 22 in
malaga). Benign hyperphenylalaninemia (1), fructosemia (4), galactosemia (4),
glycogenosis: ia (2), ib (1), iii (2), trimethylaminuria (2), tyrosinemia type 1 (1),
type 2 tyrosinemia (2), aciduria 3 oh 3 metilglutárica (2), propionic acidemia (pa)
(1), methylmalonic acidemia (mma) (4), methylmalonic acidemia with homo-
cystinuria
(1), acidemia methylglutaconic (1) maple syrup urine disease (1)
classical  homocystinuria
(deficit  cbs):
(4),  metilen  tetrahydrofolatoreductasa
(mthfr) deficiency (3), alcaptonuria (2) otc deficiency (1), deficit succinyl coa (1),
beta fatty acid oxidation deficiency (cpt1): (4), carnitine transporter deficiency
(ctd)
(4),  methylcrotonylglycinuria:
(4)  xanthomatosis  cerebrotendinous:
(2)
hiperamoniemic- hyperinsulinism syndrome (1), adrenoleukodystrophy (2) 9
were diagnosed in adults (1 alcaptonuria 1 adrenoleukodystrophy, 2 metylma-
lonic acidemia (mma): deficit cblc and cbla, 2 cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis,
3 deficit mthfr) 5 were diagnosed in adulthood as a result of neonatal screening
for children (3 ctd and 2 methylcrotonylglycinuria) 17 pregnancies (12 pku,
2 homocystinuria, 2 pa,1 mma).
Conclusions
The majority pathology in our series is pku. The most patients come from
pediatric  follow-up  the  multidisciplinary,  coordinated  and  individualized
treatment is the guarantee for optimum care and quality of life in these patients.
It is a challenge for endocrinology training and knowledge of these diseases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP398
EP399
Scanning electron microscopy of adrenal gland after laser ablation
Konstantin Kemoclidze1, Denis Pukhov2, Yuri Aleksandrov1 &
Natalya Tiumina1
1Yaroslavl State University, Yaroslavl, Russia;2Yaroslavl Branch at the
Institute of Physics and Technology of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Yaroslavl, Russia.
Purpose
The study evaluated the effects of laser ablation of adrenal glands and results of
regeneration using low-vacuum scanning electron microscopy for modeling the
effects of laser ablation on pathological focus in the adrenal glands.
Methods/design
A study performed on the rats (nZ19, male, Wistar line) with weighing 335.3G
24.9 g. At 14 of them (control 5 intact rat) under general anaesthetic was
performed local laser ablation part of left adrenal gland. For damages used
surgical  laser  apparatus
“Lami”  with  standard  options  for  parenchymatous
organs: point action quartz with polyamide-coated optics with a diameter of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
400 mm  (wavelength-1020 nm  radiation  power-2.5 watts).  Energy  exposure
amounted to 70 DJ. The adrenal glands were researched without the laser
exposure, immediately after it and 1 month later.
Results
Immediately after exposure occurs laser ablation crater with rough edges and
melted surface. It is penetrated by equidistant pores which are footprints of blood
vessels. Beneath of the surface are numerous vaporization bubbles. Around the
crater the surface wrinkles and sags due to decreased ability to retain water.
Through 1 month after the laser damages in the affected area is determined by a
scar. Among the big bundles of collagen fibers determined by amorphous chunks
of coal and caverns. Tissues with normal structure are detected near to the scar,
both inside of the adrenal gland and the tissues around her. The wrinkling and the
sagging are absent. The undamaged part of organ has retained the previous shape
and structure without hypertrophy, the damaged part the adrenal gland reduced.
Conclusion
The nature of the regeneration processes indicates a low probability of a relapse
after the destruction of a pathological focus in the adrenal after the surgical laser
ablation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP399
EP400
Acute exercise training and circulating irisin in adult mens
Tugba Arkan1,3, Mehmet 
¸ alan2,3, Aksel 
¸ elik3, Dilek Cimrin3 &
Firat Bayraktar3
1Endocrinology Department, Kocaeli Derince Education and Research
Hospital, Kocaeli, Turkey;2Endocrinology Department, Izmir Bozyaka
Education and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey;3Dokuz Eylul University
Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey.
Context
Irisin is secreted by skeletal muscles into circulation and proposed to regulate
energy homeostasis and hold therapeutic potential in diabetes and obesity.
Objective
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of acute exercise training
(6 week) on circulating plasma irisin in adult mens.
Design and setting
This was a cross-sectional study conducted in a university hospital.
Participants
A total of 33 healthy, untrained male (mean age 19) participated in the study.
Main outcome measures
Plasma irisin, insulin, high sensitive CRP (hsCRP), fasting blood glucose and
lipids were measured before and after 6 week exercise training. Body composition
was calculated by Tanita body composition analyser.
Results
There was no significant correlation between lipids, insulin levels, fasting blood
glucose with irisin levels. (rZ0.06 PZ0.973, rZ0.184 PZ0.305, rZK0.009
PZ0.959). All the participants had unsignificant weight gain (before exercise
BMIZ23.39G2.81, after exercise BMIZ23.70G2.72, PZ0.111). Irisin levels
positively correlated with hsCRP (rZ0.352, PZ0.044). Irisin level change with
acute exercise training was not significant. (PZ0.458).
Conclusion
Acute exercise training can change the irisin level in untrained males but it was
unsignificant in this study. Maybe longer period of exercise can change the levels
of irisin stronger. We find that after the training program, all participiants irisin
levels decreased. Untrained person response times to the exercise can be slower
than trained persons.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP400
EP400B
Mouse paternal-RNAs initiate pattern of metabolic disorders in a strain
dependent manner
Guzide Satir Basaran1, Yagut Akbarova1, Kezban Korkmaz1,
Kursad Unluhizarci2, Francoıs Cuzin3, Fahrettin Kelestimur1 &
Minoo Rassoulzadegan1,3
1Erciyes University, Gen Kok, Kayseri, Turkey;2Department Endo-
crinology, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey;3Inserm, U1091, CNRS,
UMR7277, University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis, UFR Sciences, Nice,
F-06108, Nice, France.
Several instances of RNA-mediated inheritance of phenotypic variation have
been reported, among them metabolic disorders. We and others have observed
that microinjection into naive fertilized mouse eggs of total sperm RNAs of obese
and diabetic males maintained on high-fat diet induce the same pathological
variation in the offspring. A role of noncoding RNAs is currently the prevailing
hypothesis.
The sperm RNA content is complex. It depends on environmental conditions, but
another level of variability is illustrated by the distinct pathological features
reported by different groups, a variability that we tentatively attributed to the use
of different inbred strains. We investigated the effect of different genotypes on the
response to high-fat diet and its transgenerational maintenance. To that purpose,
we maintained in the same housing and diet conditions mice of two inbred strains,
C57BL/6 and Balb/c and B6/D2 F1 hybrids. From F0 males raised on high-fat diet
we  derived  three  generations  by  sexual  mating
(F0,  F1
and  F2)  and  two
generations (G1 and G2) by microinjection into fertilized mouse eggs (Balb/c) of
sperm RNAs of different founders. All mice other than the F0 males were
maintained on a normal diet and followed for body weights and metabolic health
up to 22 weeks. We observed very little difference among founders of the three
genotypes fed on high fat diet. During this period strain dependant difference of
gain of weight are observed. Variations in body weight were noticeable in the F1
and perpetuated to F2 generation (follow-up so far). Glucose and insulin tolerance
tests evidenced a pathology prominent in founder animals and showed stronger
differences in a strain dependent manner in generations F1 and F2. These results
suggests that the initial signals that program offspring health are differentially
perceived  in  the  germ  line  of  the  different  genotypes  and  start  a  genetic
anticipation process. Furthermore, strain dependent phenotypic variations of the
disease spectrum (GTT and ITT) are transferable by microinjection into fertilized
eggs (Balb/c) of total sperm RNAs from C57/BL6, B6/D2 and Balb/c males.
Together, these findings uncover a novel area of RNA-mediated epigenetic
hereditary variation. Work is still in progress, up-dated results will be presented in
the meeting.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP400B
Diabetes (to include epidemiology, pathophysiology)
EP401
Co-inheritance of PAX4 and BLK Mutations (MODY 7 and 9) in an
38-year-old African patient with ketosis-prone diabetes
Winfried Schmidt1 & Heidi Lankers2
1Gemeinschaftspraxis fur Humangenetik & Genetische Labore, Hamburg,
Germany;2Zentrum fur Diabetologie Bergedorf, Schwerpunktpraxis,
Hamburg, Germany.
Introduction
Ketosis-prone diabetes (KPD) is an emerging and uncommon form of diabetes
characterized by patients who present with diabetic ketoacidosis without any
immunological autoantibody to islet antigens of classic type 1 diabetes. KPD is
mostly observed in African-American populations. Multiple, severe forms of
b-cell dysfunction appear to underlie the pathophysiology of KPD. The PAX4
gene, causing Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) subtype 9, already
has been associated with ketosis-prone diabetes.
Case report
A case report of a 38-year old male African patient with co-inheritance of PAX4
and BLK mutations (MODY 7 and 9) as a cause of ketosis prone diabetes is
presented to illustrate the clinical manifestations and difficulties in management.
The patient was hospitalized as an emergency with metabolic acidosis, partial
respiratory  compensation  with  hypocapnia  and  initial  renal  failure.  Under
intensive medical therapy the metabolic situation could be normalized. MODY
genes type 1-11 were analyzed.
DNA-Sequencing revealed two mutations: PAX4 gene, exon 1, PAX4,c.109CO
T,p.(Arg37Trp);  reference  sequence  NM_006193.2)  and BLK  gene  exon  5,
BLK,c.335TOC, p.(Phe112Ser); reference sequence NM_001715.2). The amino
acid position 37 in the PAX4 gene is located in an evolutionarily highly conserved
sequence motif across many species boundaries and the amino acid position 112
in the BLK gene is located in the functional SH3-domain of the BLK protein. We
describe clinical, biochemical and genetic features of the patient.
Conclusions
Identification of the underlying genetic causes of KPD will give a better view of
the  mechanisms  that  contribute  to  the  pathophysiology  of  the  disease.
Furthermore, proper identification may improve options to prevent KPD.
The results of the genetic analysis are discussed in the context of the clinical
findings.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP401
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP402
Calbindin-D9k in hypoxia-induced diabetes mellitus like model
Changhwan Ahn, Kipoong Kim, Song Ai Kang, Tran Dinh Nam &
Eui-Bae Jeung
College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.
It has been proposed that cellular Ca2C  signals activate hormone secretion. In
pancreatic b cells, which produce insulin, Ca2C  signals have been known to
contribute to insulin secretion. Prior to this study, we confirmed that Calbindin-
D9k (CaBP-9k) was responsible for regulation of the distribution of free calcium
in the cytoplasm. We also confirmed that insulin-secreting b cells express CaBP-
9k, and assumed that CaBP-9k play a role in b cell insulin synthesis or secretion.
Using CaBP-9k knock out (KO) mice, we demonstrated that ablation of CaBP-9k
causes type
1 diabetes by reducing insulin secretion and increasing serum
glucose. To compare the role of CaBP-9k with type 2 diabetes pathophysiological
conditions, we exposed wt and CaBP-9k KO mice to hypoxic conditions for
10 days.
Results
Hypoxia induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, increasing both insulin
signaling and insulin resistance. By exposing hypoxia, CaBP-9k KO mice showed
an increased level of ER stress marker protein relative to wild type mice. Without
hypoxic conditions, CaBP-9K ablation regulates calcium channels and causes ER
stress in a CaBP-9K specific manner. Ablation of CaBP-9k also showed decreased
levels of sulfonylurea receptor1
(SUR1) and inward-rectifier potassium  ion
channel 6.2 (Kir6.2), which are insulin secretion marker genes. Overall, the
results of the present study demonstrated that CaBP-9k regulates synthesis of
insulin and is part of the insulin-secreting calcium signaling. Therefore, impaired
CaBP-9K signaling may be linked with diabetes mellitus and CaBP-9K protein is
as a potential candidate for gene therapy of type 1 diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP402
EP403
Prevalence of diabetes mellitus in patients with hypercortisolism
Alexander Dreval1, Irina Trigolosova1, Margarita Kruglyakova1,
Irina Komerdus1, Inna Misnikova1, Yulia Kovaleva1,
Anastasia Chekanova1, Ilya Barsukov1, Galina Molchanova1 &
Bruce Wolffenbuttel2
1
Moscow Regional Scientific Research Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russia;
2
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Background
Early carbohydrate metabolism disorders (ECMDs) and diabetes mellitus (DM)
are frequently associated with endogenous hypercortisolism (EG). Prevalence of
secondary (sDM) in these cases are poorly investigated.
Aim
We aimed to assess the prevalence of ECMDs and DM in patients with EG
(pituitary-dependent Cushing disease (CD)) and adrenal-dependent Cushing (AC)
and ACTH-ectopic syndrome (ACTHs) depending on gender and age.
Patients and methods
Forty-two patients with hypercortisolism (CD - 32 patients, AC - 7 patients,
ACTHs - 3 patients), (five men, 37 women; 42.0 (33.7-49.2) years, estimated
duration of EG - 36.0 (24-70) month) were observed.
OGTT was done in those not yet diagnosed with DM to reveal asymptomatic DM
or ECMDs. Comparisons were made between patients with hypercortisolism and
participants from the general adult population
(GP) (nZ838) and an adult
population with multiple type 2 diabetes risk factors (HR group) (nZ604),
matched for age and BMI.
Results
DM was diagnosed in 26 patients with EG (62%) and in 75 (8.9%) of the general
population (P!0.001). The prevalence of ECMDs was comparable in patients
with hypercortisolism (17%) and in the GP (15.2%) and in the HR group (23.7%);
only 21% of patients with EG were normoglycaemic. The prevalence of newly
diagnosed DM was more than two times higher in patients with EG compared
with the HR group (38.1 and 16.1% accordingly, P!0.05).
The prevalence of DM in women from EG group was 1.5 times higher, than in
men (64.8 and 40%, P!0.05), among their newly diagnosed DM was two times
higher than in men (40 and 20%, P!0.05). The prevalence of DM increased with
age (from 57% (in those younger than 45 years) to 88% (older than 55 years),
(P!0.05).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
In  patients  with  hypercortisolism,  the  prevalence  of  DM  and  ECMDs
considerably exceeds that of the general population and of a high-risk group.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP403
EP404
Alpha lipoic acid attenuates high fructose induced pancreatic toxicity
Senay Topsakal1, Ozlem Ozman2, Fatma Nihan Cankara3, Sukriye Yesilot3,
Dilek Bayram4, Nilufer Genç Ozdamar5 & Sumeyra Kayran5
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Pamuklale University,
Denizli, Turkey;2Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Mehmet Akif Ersoy University, Burdur, Turkey;3Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Suleyman Demirel University,
Isparta, Turkey;4Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Suleyman Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey;5Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Physiology, Suleyman Demirel University,
Isparta, Turkey.
Objectives
Chronic  consumption  of  high  fructose  corn  syrup
(HFCS)  causes  several
problems  like insulin  resistance. The goal  of the study  was to investigate
pancreatic damages induced by chronic HFCS consumption and protective effects
of alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) on pancreatic cells.
Methods
Wistar Albino, 4 months old, female rats and weighing 250-300 g were randomly
distributed into three groups each containing eight rats. Groups were HFCS
group, HFCSCALA administered group and control group (CON). The prepared
30% solution of HFCS (F30) (24% fructose, 28% dextrose) was given in drinking
water  for
10  weeks.  ALA  treatment  started
4 weeks  later  to  first  HFCS
administration (100 mg/kg per oral, last 6 weeks). Rats were anesthetized and
euthanized by cervical dislocation 24 h after the last ALA administration. Blood
samples for biochemical (Amylase, Lipase, MDA, CAT) and tissue samples for
histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations (Caspase-3, insulin
and glucagon) were collected.
Results
Comparing the control and HFCS groups; serum glucose (150.92G39.77 and
236.50G18.28
respectively,  P!0.05),  amylase
(2165.00G150.76
and
3027.66G729.19 respectively, P!0.01), lipase (5.58G2.22 and 11.51G2.74
respectively, P!0.01) and pancreatic tissue MDA (0.0167G0.004 and 0.0193G
0.006; respectively, P!0.05) levels were increased while tissue CAT (0.0924G
0.029 and 0.0359G0.023 respectively, P!0.05) activity decreased in HFCS
group significantly. Histopathological examination revealed degenerative and
necrotic changes in Langerhans islet cells, slight inflammatory cell infiltration in
pancreatic tissue in HFCF group. Immunohistochemically significantly decrease
in insulin (2.85G0.37 and 0.87G0.64 respectively, P!0.001) and glucagon
(2.71G0.48 and 1.00G0.75 respectively, P!0.001) secreted cell while increase
in caspase-3 (0.14G0.37 and 1.00G0.75 respectively, P!0.05) expression were
seen in this group compared the controls. In ALA treated group all of these
pathologic conditions were improved.
Conclusions
This  study  indicated  that  HFCS  induced  pancreatic  lesions  but  ALA  has
ameliorative effects.
Keywords:  High  fructose  corn  syrup,  oxidative  stress,  pancreas  pathology,
alpha lipoic acid
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP404
EP405
A novel E108D mutation of AVP-NPII gene in a Turkish patient with
central diabetes insipidus
Merve Ozcan1, Tugce Karaduman1, Emel Saglar1, Beril Erdem1,
Ferhat Deniz2, Arif Yonem2, Kamil Baskoy2, Seyit Ahmet Ay2,
Ofcan Oflaz1 & Hatice Mergen1
1Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Hacettepe University, Beytepe,
Ankara 06800, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
GATA Haydarpasa Teaching Hospital, Istanbul 34668, Turkey.
Familial central or neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus (FNDI) results from
insufficient production of antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin, which is
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
caused by mutations in arginine vasopressin-neurophysin II gene (AVP-NPII).
In this study, we present the clinical features of a male Turkish patient with
autosomal  dominant  neurohypophyseal  DI  caused  by  a  novel  mutation
(p.E108D). The prospective clinical data were collected for the proband patient
and his family members. The patient had severe polyuria (10.9 l/day), polydipsia
(12 l/day), fatique, and deep thirstiness from his infancy. While being performed
water deprivation test, diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus was confirmed
according  to  increase  in urine  osmolality  from
139  to  431 mOsm/kg after
desmopressin acetate injection. Some of family members of this patient had
severe polyuria, nocturia, polydipsia, fatigue as well. The genomic DNA of the
proband and the other family members were isolated and the amplification of the
AVP-NPII gene was carried out with polymerase chain reaction. We were
sequenced all exons and intron-exon boundaries of the gene. We detected a novel
heterozygous missense mutation at codon 108, which causes the the substitution
of Glu (GAG) by a Asp (GAT) in exon 3. A three-dimensional protein structure
prediction was shown for the mutant AVP-NPII protein and compared with the
wt. In our future studies we are planning to do functional analyses studies for
understanding the function of the p.E108D mutation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP405
EP406
Decreasing betatrophin levels during pregnancy in healthy women
Anna Zielinska, Rafal Maciulewski, Katarzyna Siewko, Anna Poplawska-
Kita, Gabryela Kozlowska, Danuta Lipinska, Maria Gorska &
Malgorzata Szelachowska
Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine,
Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
Introduction and aims
To date we have had some evidence that betatrophin is associated with insulin
resistance. Some studies have demonstrated that betatrophin levels are elevated in
type 2 diabetes, obesity and gestational diabetes. It has been shown that in mice
betatrophin significantly improves beta cell function and glucose tolerance. This
is the first study on betatrophin in which pregnant women were observed during
all trimesters and in postpartum period to evaluate its role in increasing insulin
resistance and physiological proliferation of beta cells.
Materials and methods
We examined 80 healthy pregnant women in each trimester (T1, T2, T3). Forty-
five of them were additionally examined at 3MPP. We also examined 30 non-
pregnant women of reproductive age without obesity as the control group. We
measured  betatrophin  levels
(ELISA),  glucose
(enzymatic  method  with
hexokinase), insulin (immunoradiometric method), C-peptide (enzyme amplified
sensitivity  immunoassay),  HbA1c
(HPLC).  We  calculated  HOMA-IR  and
HOMA%b. The oral glucose tolerance test was performed in T2 and 3MPP.
Results
In T1 betatrophin level was highest and it significantly differed from T2 and T3
(1.84G1.51 ng/ml vs 1.46G1.25 ng/ml, P!0.05; 1.84G1.51 ng/ml vs 1.23G
1.29 ng/ml, P!0.01; respectively). In T3 median value of betatrophin reached
lowest level and we observed significant difference with 3MPP (1.23G1.29 ng/ml
vs 1.49G1.54 ng/ml, P!0.01). In 3MPP betatrophin level was similar to the
control group (1.49G1.54 vs 1.47G1.78). HOMA-IR and HOMA%b increased
during the course of gestation. It reached a peak in T3 (2.3G1.06; 227.7G140.8,
respectively) and returned to the healthy control values (1.53G1.3; 88.86G68,
respectively) at 3MPP (1.35G0.6; 92.5G37.3, respectively). Data are shown as
median and interquartile range.
Conclusions
Decreasing betatrophin concentration during pregnancy despite the physiological
proliferation of beta cells throughout gestation can suggest that betatrophin plays
an insignificant role in the expansion of beta cell mass and insulin resistant during
pregnancy.  Further  studies are  needed  to establish  what  factors  impact on
betatrophin levels during each trimester of pregnancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP406
EP407
A rare form of pancreatic diabetes: a 25 year-follow-up
Nesrine Cheikhrouhou, Ines Barka, Koussay Elleuch, Ines Slim &
Larbi Chaieb
Department of endocrinology, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia.
Introduction
Fibrocalculous pancreatic diabetes is an uncommon type of diabetes mellitus
due to chronic calcific non-alcoholic pancreatitis. It is associated to several
particularities based on glycemic control and the occurrence of degenerative and
metabolic complications, in addition to chronic pancreatitis complications.
Observation
A 17-year-old  male,  with  no  familial  history  of  diabetes  and  no  alcohol
consumption, was hospitalized in 1989 for ketone prone diabetes. He has reported
abdominal pain for about 2 years, in a chronic and relapsing mode associated with
progressive  weight  loss.  Physical  examination  revealed  no  particularities.
Biologic investigation has shown a raised random blood glycemia level. The
urinalysis  showed  massive  glycosuria  and  ketonuria.  The  abdominal  X-ray
showed multiple pancreatic calcifications. The
25-year follow-up showed a
difficulty  to  obtain  a  good  glycemic  control  despite  of  a  good  treatment
adherence. Improvement of glycemic control was obtained by the use of insulin
analogues. No diabetic ketoacidosis has occurred during the evolution. Diabetic
retinopathy has been diagnosed and treated after 10 year-duration of DM. In 2009,
acute  pancreatitis with  worsening  signs  of malabsorption  was documented.
Abdominal computed tomography scans revealed chronic calcifiant pancreatitis
with  porto-spleno-mesenteric  venous  thrombosis.  No  pancreatic  tumor  was
found. The etiologic exploration of thrombosis revealed a resistance of activated
protein C. The patient was hence treated by pancreatic enzyme granules and a
lifelong anti coagulation therapy. The last biologic control showed an improved
glycemic control without any malabsorption sign. Abdominal CT showed a
complete involution of pancreas and a portal cavernoma.
Conclusion
This case presentation highlights how important is to suspect fibrocalculous
pancreatic diabetes especially in the presence of chronic abdominal pain. The
follow-up of such patients should be focused not only on diabetes clinical and
biological markers, but also on pancreatitis complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP407
EP408
Two neonatal diabetes cases with different mutations and treatments
Olcay Evliyaoglu1, Bahar Ozcabı1, Emel Ataog˘lu2, Feride Bucak1 &
Oya Ercan1
1Istanbul University Cerrahpa¸a Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey;2Haseki
Eg˘itim ve Ara¸tırma Hastanesi, Istanbul, Turkey.
Neonatal diabetes, is monogenic and can be due to different mutations. Here we
report two patients with neoanatal diabetes, with two different mutations and
treatments.
Case 1 was a female infant of consanguineous parents born at 37 weeks of
gestation with a birth weight of
1900 g. After birth she was followed for
respiratory distress and hyperglycemia. Her blood glucose was controlled with
glargine  insulin  and  with  rapid  acting  insulin  when  needed.  Her  physical
examination was normal except hip dysplasia. A homoxygous g.23508363A O G
mutation  was  identified  which  is  predicted  to  result  in  decreased  PTF1A
expression during pancreatic development.
Case 2 was a male infant of nonconsanguineous parents born at 35 weeks of
gestation with a birth weight of 3400 g. After birth he was followed for seizures
and hyperglycemia. He had hypotonia and decreased muscle strength. Glargine
insulin  was  started  with  Humalog  insulin  when  needed.  His  convulsions
continued unrelated with his blood glucose levels. A heterozygous previosly
reported KCNJ11 missense mutation, p.C166Y was identified which is predicted
to affect the Kir6.2 subunit of the KATP channel. Glibenclamid belonging to
sulfanylurea group was started. In the follow up his glibenclamid dose was
increased while insulin dose was decreased. With this treatment regimen his
blood sugar levels were controlled and although not very significant a relative
improvement in his neurological status was observed.
In neonatal diabetes, genetic analysis is relevant, regarding to the mutation,
treatment and prognosis can be determined.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP408
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP409
Functional analysis of G12E mutation of AVPR2 gene in Turkish
patients with diabetes insipidus
Beril Erdem1, Emel Saglar1, Tugce Karaduman1, Merve Ozcan1,
Ferhat Deniz2 & Hatice Mergen1
1Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, GATA
Haydarpasa Teaching Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a rare disorder which is characterized with inability to
concentrate urine because of severe liquid-balance impairment. Mutations in
AVPR2 gene is one of the causes of DI. AVPR2 is a G protein coupled receptor
(GPCR) and its specific agonist is arginine vasopressin (AVP). When AVP binds
to the AVPR2, which locates on the basolateral side of collecting duct principal
cells of the kidney, it triggers accumulation of cAMP in the cell as a seconder
messenger. If AVPR2 has a mutation, receptor could loose its function which is
important for liquid balance of the body. The aim of this study is making
functional characterization of G12E mutation of AVPR2 gene. G12E mutation
was seen in three cases in our study. Functional characterization of this mutant is
important for the therapeutic studies. G12E mutation was generated by site-
directed mutagenesis strategy. For this purpose, pLV2R (a mammalian expression
vector) was used and the mutant construct was checked with DNA sequencing.
Totally expression in the cell and cell surface expression of the mutant receptor
was analyzed with ELISA experiments. In addition to this, cAMP accumulation
assay  was  performed  after  stimulation  of  mutant  receptor  with  different
concentrations of AVP. According to the ELISA results, G12E mutation showed
reduced expression in total and also on cell surface. The results of cAMP
accumulation  assay  supported  our  ELISA  results.  Mutant  receptor  showed
reduced Emax and it also has a shift for EC50 value according to the wild type
receptor. In conclusion, in vitro studies revealed that this mutation yields partial
expression in the cell surface.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP409
EP410
Prevalence of biochemical hypoglycaemia in everyday practice
Lina Zabuliene1,2, Birute Pauliukiene2, Airida Audrone Bagdziuniene3 &
Jurgita Urboniene4
1
Clinics of Rheumatology, Traumatology - Orthopaedics and Reconstruc-
tive Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania;
2
Antakalnio Outpatient Clinic, Vilnius, Lithuania;3Centre of Endo-
crinology, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius,
Lithuania;4Infectious Diseases and Tuberculosis Hospital, Vilnius
University Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is the main tool in population based screening
for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Sometimes OGTT results are showing asymptomatic
lowering of post-load blood glucose. Post-load plasma glucose (2hPG) level
3.9 mmol/l
(70 mg/dl)  and  lower  shows  biochemical  hypoglycaemia.  Bio-
chemical hypoglycaemia might be observed among individuals with abnormal
glucose tolerance and in healthy population. The objective of the investigation
was to assess a prevalence of biochemical hypoglycaemia during OGTT in
routine outpatient practice.
Material and methods
We  conducted  an  audit  of  75 g  standardized  OGTT  performed  at  Vilnius
Antakalnio outpatient clinic from 3 January 2011 to 15 December 2014 and
analysed data of 5575 adult patients. We applied 2006 WHO criteria for impaired
fasting glucose (IFG), impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and diabetes. Patients
with  biochemical  hypoglycaemia  during  OGTT,  and  with  normal  glucose
tolerance (NGT) or IFG were compared using Student t-test.
Results
Mean patients’ age was 53.64G15.59 years (36.4% male and 63.6% female).
Mean FPG was 5.87G0.65 mmol/l, mean 2hPG was 6.20G2.25 mmol/l. OGTT
detected IFG in 1518 (27.2%), IGT in 778 (14.0%), diabetes in 286 (5.1%)
patients. NGT was found in 2993 patients. Total 760 patients (13.6%) had
biochemical hypoglycaemia: 547 (18.3%) patients with NGT and 213 (14.0%)
patients with IFG. Within NGT group patients having biochemical hypoglycae-
mia were younger by 5.02 years (P!0.0001) and had lower level of FPG by
0.07 mmol/l (PZ0.001) than those who did not present biochemical hypogly-
caemia. Males experienced biochemical hypoglycaemia more frequently than
women  (24.4%  vs  15.5%,  P!0.0001).  Within  IFG  group  patients  with
biochemical hypoglycaemia were younger by 3.61 years (P!0.0001) and had
lower level of FPG by 0.09 mmol/l (P!0.0001) than those who did not present
biochemical hypoglycaemia.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Prevalence of biochemical hypoglycaemia is about 14%. Biochemical hypogly-
caemia is associated with younger age, male gender and lower fasting plasma
glucose level.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP410
EP411
Inpatient glycaemic variability and long-term mortality: a neglected
diabetic parameter?
Joseph Timmons1, Gregory Jones1, Christopher Sainsbury1 &
Scott Cunningham2
1NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow, UK;2University of Dundee,
Dundee, UK.
Aim
To determine the association between recorded inpatient glycaemic variability
and long-term mortality in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Methods
Inpatient capillary blood glucose (CBG) readings from eight acute hospitals were
included. Data was analysed from first admission within the dataset with O4
measured CBGs. 28 353 admissions were identified (24 181 type 2 DM, 4,172
type
1 DM). Matching parameters  were:  age,  diabetes  duration,  admission
duration, median CBG and interquartile range of CBG values. Mortality analysis
was performed from 90 days post discharge over five years, investigating 1) those
with CBG IQR in the top half of all IQR measurements (matched for all except
IQR), vs those in the lower half and 2) those with the lowest quartile median
glucose (matched for all except median).
Results
1) Glycaemic variability: 3099 matched pairs. Total mortality over the period of
analysis: 31.2% (high IQR) vs 26.5% (low IQR) (P!0.001, HR 1.22 - Cox
proportional  hazard  model  of  survival  analysis).
2)  Median  glucose:
4177
matched pairs. Total mortality over the period of analysis: 32.4% (lowest quartile
median glucose) vs 26.1% (top 3 quartiles median glucose) (P!0.001, HR 1.25 -
Cox proportional hazard model of survival analysis).
Conclusion
Higher inpatient glycaemic variability is strongly associated with increased long-
term mortality. With cohort IQR matching, lower median CBG is associated with
higher long-term mortality. CBG variability may increase risk by increasing
hypoglycaemia  exposure.  This  will  occur  more  frequently  for  any  given
variability level at lower median CBG. Variability per se has also been postulated
to increase oxidative stress. This may act synergistically with hypoglycaemia
increasing cardiovascular morbidity.
Glycaemic targets and treatment modalities for inpatients with diabetes should
primarily aim to minimise glycaemic variability. Where greater CBG variability
is unavoidable a less stringent CBG target should be considered.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP411
EP412
Reduction of autoimmune regulator Aire mRNA and number of
Treg-cells in mesenteric lymph nodes in the offspring of rats with
experimental gestational diabetes
Tanya Prozorova & Alex Kamyshny
Zaporizhzhya State Medical University, Zaporizhzhya, Ukraine.
Introduction
Formation of immunological tolerance to self antigens is an important mechanism
that prevents the development of autoimmune diseases.
Methods
With the help of molecular genetic and immunofluorescence techniques we
investigated the effects of experimental gestational diabetes (EGD) on the level of
mRNA expression of autoimmune regulator Aire and differentiation features of
Foxp3C  cells in mesenteric lymph nodes in the offspring of Wistar rats. To
determine the level of Aire mRNA was performed RT-PCR in real-time by
thermocycler CFX96 Real-Time PCR Detection Systems. The relative level of
gene expression were studied with rat reference genes GAPDH by the method
DDCt. Statistical analysis were conducted using available software ‘Bio-Rad
CFX Manager 3.1’ (Bio-Rad, USA). The immunopositive Foxp3C-lymphocytes
were determined using an indirect immunofluorescence technique with using a
monoclonal rat antibody.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Results
The offspring of EGD rats showed a reduction of autoimmune regulator Aire
mRNA in 2,3-8,1 times (P!0.05) in MLN cells compared to control animals. The
observed decrease in the transcriptional activity of Aire is accompanied by
reduction in the number of regulatory Foxp3C  lymphocytes in MLN in the
offspring  of  rats  with  EHD,  as  well  as  reduction  of  concentration  of  the
transcription factor Foxp3 in lymphocytes of cortical plateau.
Conclusions
The revealed changes evidence of abuse of formation of peripheral immuno-
logical tolerance and can trigger the development of AID in the offspring of
mothers with EHD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP412
EP413
Oral disposition index as a predictor of changes in glucose tolerance
status over time
Barbara Nedel, Luciana Antoniolli, Tassia Pazinato, Vanessa Piccoli,
Mayara Beer, Sheila Piccoli & Fernando Gerchman
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Introduction
Type 2 diabetes (DM) is characterized by both insulin resistance and b-cell
dysfunction. The oral disposition index (DIo), a measurement of b-cell function
and insulin sensitivity, is considered the best predictor of progression to a worse
GTS, although it was not well tested for regression to a better GTS.
Objectives
To assess the validity of DIo and determine whether DIo predicts regression to a
better GTS.
Methods
At first evaluation of a longitudinal study, patients from an outpatient clinic
(nZ103; 54.8G11.4 years; females 69.9%) were submitted to a 75-g OGTT and
classified according to different degrees of glucose tolerance in (PDM (nZ49)
and DM (nZ54)). Insulin sensitivity was estimated as 1/fasting insulin and b-cell
function as the ratio of the change in insulin to the change in glucose from 0 to 30
(DI0-30/DG0-30). The DIo was calculated as (DI0-30/DG0-30 ! 1/fasting
insulin). Patients were followed-up by 25 (15-38) months (median (P25-P75))
and their data were recollected. Patients were classified as regressors and non-
regressors to a better GTS.
Results
DI0-30/DG0-30 demonstrated a curvilinear relationship with 1/fasting insulin.
The confidence limits for the slope of the log-transformed estimates included -1
for  DIo  for  regressors  and  non-regressors,  consistent  with  a  hyperbolic
relationship. While at follow-up 22.2 and 38.9% of patients with DM respectively
regressed to NGT and PDM, 26.5% of patients with PDM regressed to NGT and
14.3% progressed to DM.
Conclusion
A total of 44.7% of patients regressed to a better glucose tolerance status while
participating in a program with multiple interventions for the treatment of
hyperglycemia. Although the DIo was not able to predict these changes, a
composite measure of b-cell function was proved to be reproducible and could be
applied for DM research in the Brazilian population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP413
EP414
High prevalence of diabetes and pre-diabetes in psychiatry inpatients
Pratyusha Naidu1, Leonid Churilov3, Alvin Kong1, Richard Kanaan9,
Henry Wong2, Arielle Van Mourik2, Anthony Yao2, Elizabeth Cornish1,
Graeme K Hart4, Elizabeth Owen-Jones5, Raymond Robbins7, Que Lam6,
Katherine Samaras10, Jeffrey Zajac1,8 & Elif I Ekinci1,8
1Department of Endocrinology, Austin Health, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia;2Department of General Medicine, Austin Health, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia;3The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental
Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;4Department of Intensive Care,
Austin Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;5Austin Centre for Applied
Clinical Informatics, Austin Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;
6Department of Pathology, Austin Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;
7Department of Administrative Informatics, Austin Health, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia;8University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia;9Department of Psychiatry, Austin Health, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia;10St Vincent’s Clinical School, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
Objective
To determine the prevalence and characteristics of psychiatry inpatients with type
2 diabetes and pre-diabetes, compared to psychiatry inpatients without diabetes.
Research design and methods
Inpatients aged O30 years at the Austin psychiatry unit (February 2014-April
2015) had HbA1c measurements as part of the Diabetes Discovery Initiative.
Patients  were  divided  into  three  groups
- diabetes
(HbA1c  R6.5%,
48 mmol/mol),  pre-diabetes
(HbA1c  5.7-6.4%,
39 mmol/mol-46 mmol/mol)
and no diabetes (HbA1c % 5.6%, 38 mmol/mol). Data on baseline characteristics,
co-morbidities, psychiatric illnesses and treatment were collected.
Results
Of 335 psychiatry inpatients (median age 41 years) 14% (nZ46) had diabetes and
19% (nZ63) had pre-diabetes, more than threefold higher than the aged matched
general population. The most prevalent diagnoses were schizophrenia, depression
and  substance  abuse.  Approximately
50%  of  inpatients  were  on  atypical
antipsychotics or anti-depressants. Compared to inpatients without diabetes,
those with diabetes and pre-diabetes were older (median age 49 and 46 vs 40,
PZ!0.001). Patients with diabetes compared to those without diabetes were at
least twice as likely to have hypertension, obesity and hyperlipidaemia (all
P%0.002).  Multivariable  analysis revealed  the  main significant variables
associated  with  diabetes  to  be  age
(PZ0.02),  substance  abuse
(PZ0.04),
hyperlipidemia (PZ0.03) and aripiprazole use (PZ0.01).
Conclusions
Despite relative youth, one third of all psychiatric inpatients have diabetes or pre-
diabetes. Presence of diabetes in psychiatric inpatients is associated with older
age and substance abuse. The management of glycaemic status in psychiatric
inpatients following discharge is difficult and hence routine HbA1c measurement
as an inpatient presents an opportunity to address glycaemic management.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP414
EP415
Twenty-four hour blood pressure monitoring in women with gestacional
diabetes mellitus
Begon˜a Sánchez-Lechuga, Cristina López-Tinoco, Carmen López, Julián
Andrés Tamayo, Isabel Mateo, Francisco Javier Vilchez & Manuel Aguilar
Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital Universitario Puerta del
Mar, Cádiz, Andalucia, Spain.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is associated with an increased risk of
pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH). Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
(ABPM) has been used to screen for PIH and preeclampsia in normotensive type 1
diabetic women. To date, there are no data regarding ABPM in women with
GDM. The aim of the study was to establish blood pressure (BP) profiles for
pregnant with GDM, using ABPM and determine whether a BP pattern can define
a population at risk for developing PIH. We analysed the relation between BP
profiles  and  baseline  characteristics,  metabolic  parameters,  obstetrics  and
perinatal  complications.  We  prospectively  studied
62
women  with  GDM
recruited at 26-32 weeks of pregnancy. ABPM was carried out for one 24-h
period using the SPACELABS 90207 ABP monitor. Four groups based on
nocturnal fall pattern: dippers, non-dippers, extreme dippers, and risers. The mean
age 34G4.4 years, BMI 27 kg/m2 and HbA1C 5.05%. Forty-five percent had a
family  history  of  Type
2
Diabetes;  and
33.9%  of  high  BP.  The  mean
systolic/diastolic BP was 107.9/65.7 mmHg. By ABPM, 20 (41.7%) patients
were pattern dippers, 2 (4.2%) extreme dippers, 20 (41.7%) non-dippers, and
6
(12.5%) risers. Comparing dipper/non-dippers groups, 24 h microalbuminuria
excretion was significantly higher in the dipper group
(0.56
vs 2.03 ng/ml,
P!0.05). We observed higher levels of night-time diastolic BP in non-dippers
(62.9 vs 56.4 mmHg). Fifty-one women delivered to date, 5.8% had preeclampsia
and 7.8% PIH. Caesarean delivery in 25% of women and 17.6% macrosomia,
without significant differences between groups. We concluded that a higher rate
of the non-dippers pattern were observed in women with GDM and it seems to be
associated with other factors, such as 24 h microalbuminuria excretion. Thus,
higher levels of night-time systolic/diastolic BP could be a useful predictor of
PIH. Further studies will be needed to determine the relationships between BP
alterations  and  baseline,  metabolic  characteristics  and  obstetrics/perinatal
outcomes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP415
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP416
Differences in the risk factors associated with diabetic retinopathy
between type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus
Wojciech Matuszewski1, Elz˙bieta Bandurska-Stankiewicz1,
Joanna Rutkowska1, Katarzyna Myszka-Podgórska1, Robert Modzelewski1,
Rakesh Jalali2 & Iwona Sosnowska3
1University of Warmia and Mazury, Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetology
and Internal Medicine, Olsztyn, Poland;2Provincial Hospital in Olsztyn,
Emergency Department, Olsztyn, Poland;3The Warmia and Mazury Branch
of the National Health Fund in Olsztyn, Olsztyn, Poland.
Introduction
The aim of the study was to examine the risk factors associated with diabetic
retinopathy (DR) in adult patients with DM1 and DM2.
Design
The study group consisted of adults patients with DM1 and DM2, diagnosed
according  to the  WHO  criteria. Risk  factors  for  diabetic  retinopathy  were
evaluated on the demographic data, medical history, clinical and biochemical
parameters related to metabolic control of diabetes. We collected also ophthalmic
anamnesis: ophthalmic examination and the presence of diabetic eye compli-
cations before inclusion to the study. Statistical analysis was performed using
the statistical package STATISTICA 10 GB and econometric program GRETL
1.9.9 cvs.
Results
We examined 1209 patients, age 54.9 (15.79) years, 315 (26%) DM1, age 37.0
(13.55) years, duration of diabetes 11.0 (8.60) years, and 894 (74%) DM2, age
61.2
(11.13) years, duration of the diabetes 10.5 (8.09) years. Patients were treated
by Diabetologists (39%) and GP (61%). 42% were inhabitants of large cities, 28%
small and medium cities and 26% from rural areas. HbA1c was significantly
higher  in  DM1  8.44
(2.02)%  vs.  DM2  7.84  (1.67)%.  DM1  patients  were
characterized by hyperfiltration and albuminuria. In DM2 albuminuria and low
GFR were observed. Model of the logistic regression indicated following risk
factors for DR: duration of diabetes, HbA1c, albumin/creatinine ratio, GFR,
smoking and model therapy of DM.
Conclusions
1) We found differences in the risk factors associated with DR between DM1 and
DM2. 2) Risk factors for DR in the DM1: duration of DM, HbA1c, G1 stage of
diabetic nephropathy, smoking. 3) Risk factors for DR in DM2: duration of DM,
HbA1c, G2 stage of diabetic nephropathy, smoking, late introduction of insulin
therapy in the management of hyperglycemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP416
EP417
Abstract withdrawn.
EP418
MiRNA-binding site polymorphisms of MODY genes associated with
lipid profiles in Chinese patients with gestational diabetes mellitus
Xiaojing Wang1, Wei Li1, Jinsong Gao2, Liangkun Ma2, Ping Fan1,
Min Nie1 & Xinhua Xiao1
1Department of Endocrinology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China;2Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing, China.
Objective
Both MODY and GDM are characterized by pancreatic beta cell dysfunction. The
study aimed to first investigate the associations between miR-SNPs of HNF4A,
HNF1A and HNF1B genes and the GDM susceptibility and lipid profiles.
Methods
The software PolymiRTS were used to screen miR-SNPs. Genotyping of SNPs
was performed with TaqMan allelic discrimination assays in 839 GDM patients
and 900 controls. Multivariable logistic regression analysis and multiple linear
regression adjusted for age were used to analyze the association.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
A total of three miR-SNPs rs6130615 (T/C, HNF4A), rs1169309 (T/G, HNF1A)
and rs2688 (C/A, HNF1B) were selected, and the SNPs were located in miR-130a,
miR-19a and miR-96 binding site respectively. The rs6130615, rs1169309 and
rs2688 were not associated with GDM in Chinese Han women (PO0.05). We
observed HNF1A rs1169309 genotype TT exhibited increased total cholesterol
and LDL-c levels compared with wild genotype GG (PZ0.003 and PZ0.031).
After adjustment for age and pre-BMI, the minor allele T rs1169309 SNP was
found to be positively associated with total cholesterol (P!0.001) and LDL-c
levels (PZ0.010). We also found rs1169309 genotype TTCCT exhibited higher
ApoA1 levels (PZ0.029), and rs6130615 genotype TT carriers had higher
ApoA1 levels than CTCCC carriers.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP418
EP419
Association between 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and diabetes
Georgios Papadakis1, Kassiani Kakava2, Theodora Pappa1,
Nikolaos Dogkas3, Vassiliki Villiotou3 & Anastasios Pappas1
1Department of Endocrinology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus,
Athens, Greece;2Department of Otolaryngology, Metaxa Anticancer
Hospital, Pireaus, Athens, Greece;3Department of Biochemistry,
Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
A significant body of literature supports that 25(OH)vitD deficiency is associated
with insulin resistance. We studied the prevalence of 25(OH)vitD deficiency
across the spectrum of glucose metabolism.
Design
The study participants (441 total, 362 females (82.1%) and 79 males (17.9%)) had
a mean age (GS.D.) of 64.59 (G9.44) years, range: 32-92 years. The study
population was divided into two groups: Individuals with diabetes (nZ184, 33
males), and controls with normal glucose levels (nZ257, 46 males).
Results
The mean 25(OH)vitD values for males and females patients was 22.9G11.6 and
21.6G11.9 ng/ml respectively, PZ0.815. The mean 25(OH)vitDGSD levels
were significantly lower in subjects with diabetes (18.6G10.6 ng/ml) compared
to normal subjects (24.2G12.2 ng/ml), PZ0.035. There was no difference in the
mean age of patients and sex distribution between the two groups. 25(OH)vitD
deficiency was observed  in
49.7%  of the entire study population and was
significantly more frequent in patients with diabetes compared to controls (60.9 vs
41.6% respectively). Only 26 out of 184 (14.1%) of patients with diabetes had
25(OH)vitD sufficiency and levels above 30 ng/ml, compared to 74 out 257
(28.8%) of individuals with normal glucose (P!0.001).
Conclusions
This study illustrates the higher prevalence of 25(OH)vitD deficiency among
patients with diabetes. From a clinical standpoint, specific advice needs to be
provided especially to people with diabetes. Vitamin D supplements on a regular
basis over the year and adequate sun exposure could be also recommended in
order to achieve sufficient levels of 25(OH)vitD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP419
EP420
Molecular and clinical identification of A45T mutation in AQP2 gene
Tugce Karaduman1, Merve Ozcan1, Emel Saglar1, Beril Erdem1,
Ferhat Deniz2, Arif Yonem2, Kamil Baskoy2, Seyit Ahmet Ay2,
Ofcan Oflaz1 & Hatice Mergen1
1Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Hacettepe University, Beytepe,
Ankara 06800, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
GATA Haydarpasa Teaching Hospital, Istanbul 34668, Turkey.
Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a disorder which is rarely seen and it is characterized by
polydipsia and polyuria. Inadequate secretion of arginine vasopressin (AVP) from
hypothalamus or inadequate response of kidney cells to AVP could be causes of
DI. Therefore, any mutations in AVPR2, AVP and AQP2 genes which are the
parts of that stimulation and response pathyway can cause DI. In this study,
mutational analyse was performed for A45T mutation in AQP2 gene. We present
a novel  homozygous missense  mutation at  codon
45,  which  causes  the
substitution of Ala (GCC) by a Thr (ACC) in exon 1 in a male Turkish patient
with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI). Some of family members of this
patient had also polyuria, nocturia, polydipsia, fatigue as well. The patient had
severe polyuria polydipsia, fatique, and deep thirstiness from his infancy. While
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
being  performed  water  deprivation  test,  diagnosis  of  NDI  was  confirmed
according to increase in urine osmolality after desmopressin acetate injection. We
also  did  some bioinformatical  analysis  and we  predicted  three-dimensional
structure of the mutant AQP2 protein. We suggest that functional characterization
studies will enlight the function of the mutant AQP2 protein.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP420
EP421
The prevalence of insulin resistance in the Turkish population
Ahmet Kaya1, Elif Turan2, Mehmet Uyar3, Fahri Bayram4 & Yasar Turan5
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Meram Medical Faculty,
Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey;2Department of
Endocrinology, Medical Faculty, Bozok University, Yozgat, Turkey;
3
Department of Public Health, Meram Medical Faculty, Necmettin Erbakan
University, Konya, Turkey;4Department of Endocrinology, Medical
Faculty, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey;5Department of Cardiology,
Medical Faculty, Bozok University, Yozgat, Turkey.
Introduction
We aimed to investigate the homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR) and relation of HOMA-IR with age, sex and body mass index (BMI)
and the prevalence of diabetes in Turkish population of different regions.
Methods
Cross-sectional observational study was done in the frame of Turkish prevalence
of insulin resistance multicenter study. The study sample consisted of volunteers
from seven different regions of Turkey. Weight, height, waist circumference were
determined. BMI, blood pressure, fasting blood glucose, fasting blood insulin was
performed. Insulin resistance was calculated using HOMA-IR.
Results
The prevalence of DM, impaired fasting glucose and insulin resistance (IR) were,
11.1, 21.3, 26.2% respectively in seven regions of Turkey. IR was detected 28.9%
in  women,  25.1%  in men.  The difference between  men  and  women  were
significant (PZ0.04). The prevalence of IR in postmenopausal women (30.8%)
was higher than premenopausal (25.1%) (P!0.04). According to age groups;
prevalence of IR in the age of 50-59 (33.8% P!.001) was higher than the other
age groups. The prevalence of IR was higher in BMIO25, in subjects with
hypertension and in subjects with living in city center (P!.05).
Conclusion
The high prevalence of IR and DM in Turkey is one of the important public health
problem. There is an urgent necessity to institute more aggressive nation wide
public health measures and screening programs about obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP421
EP422
The antropometric and metabolic parametres in women with previous
gestational diabetes mellitus during a 30-month observation
Joanna Rutkowska, Elzbieta Bandurska-Stankiewicz, Katarzyna
Myszka-Podgórska, Dorota Wiatr-Bykowska, Wojciech Matuszewski &
Monika Olszewska
Faculty of Medical Science, Endocrinology and Diabetology Clinic,
University of Varmia and Masuria, Olsztyn, Poland.
Introduction
The aim of the study was to assess antropometric and metabolic parametres in
women with previous gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) during a 30-month
observation.
Design
Our prospective study cohort consisted of 367 women with GDM diagnosed
according to WHO criteria. Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was performed
during 6-10 weeks and 12, 18, 24, 30 months after delivery. On every 6th month
between 12th and 30th month after delivery we estimated: BMI, abdominal
circumference, blood pressure and the lipid profile, fasting plasma glucose and
insulin levels were assessed, from which the HOMA- IR was calculated. Yearly
OGTT was performed.
Results
139
(37.9%), 85 (23%) and 43 (12%) women underwent OGTT after 6-10 weeks,
at 12 mo. and at 24 mo. after the delivery respectively. BMI 12 mo. after delivery
was higher than pre-pregnancy BMI (23.47 and 24.12 kg/m2 respectively), 18, 24,
30 months after delivery BMI was lower than before pregnancy. Abdominal
obesity was found in 44.7% women at 24 months and in 27.3% at 30 months after
delivery. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure were within normal population
limits. Total cholesterol varied 201-172.5 mg/dl. HDL 67-63 mg/dl, LDL 112.6-
96.2 mg/dl, triglycerides 78-85.5 mg/dl. HOMA IR was growing from 1.59-
12 mo. to 2.09 mo. - 30 mo. after delivery. IFG was found in 12.96% women in
12 mo., 26.67% in 18 mo., 32.26% in 24 mo., 33.33% in 30 mo. IGT was found in
5% 12 mo., 24% in 24 mo., 28.57% in 30 mo. after delivery. We found no
diabetes mellitus.
Conclusions
Insulin resistance is high and growing in women with previous GDM after
delivery. The number of women with prediabetes status after delivery becomes an
epidemiologic challenge. We also observed that women with GDM are very often
lost to the follow up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP422
EP423
Diabetes and glycemic control in acute heart failure: complications,
hospital stay and prognosis
Sílvia Paredes1, Melina Lopes2, Margarida Ramos-Lopes1, David Araújo1,
Rosa Cardoso1, Ana Margarida Monteiro1, Teresa Pimentel1,
Olinda Marques1 & Marta Alves1
1Hospital de Braga, Braga, Portugal;2USF Maxisaude, ACeS Cávado I,
Braga, Portugal.
Introduction
Few studies have evaluated the impact of type 2 diabetes on the prognosis of acute
heart failure (HF). This study assessed the effect of diabetes and glycemic control
on complications, hospital stay and prognosis in patients with acute HF.
Methods
Retrospectively,  databases  of
428  hospitalized  patients  by  acute  HF  were
analyzed, 201 diabetic patients and 227 controls. Statistical analysis was done
using SPSS, considering statistical significance for P!0.05.
Results
Of all patients, 61.4% were female and the average age was 77.6G9.6 years. The
median of hospital stay was 8 days (interquartil range (IQR) 8). Glycosilated
hemoglobin (A1c) (median 7.2%; IQR 1.8) was available in 136 diabetic patients.
The median of glucose was 177 mg/dl in the diabetic group and 119 mg/dl in
controls. Glucose was higher in patients that had a posterior re-hospitalization for
acute HF (PZ0.034) and a negative correlation was found between the glucose
value and the length of hospital stay (PZ0.002). It was not found a significant
difference in respect to complications, hospital stay, re-hospitalization and death in
diabetic versus non diabetic patients. However, diabetic patients with an A1c!7%
had a significant higher proportion of deaths compared to those with an A1cO7%.
Conclusion
At  hospital  admission,  glucose  seems  to  be  related  with  the  risk  of
re-hospitalization and the length of hospital stay in patients admitted for acute
HF pointing out the need of an excellent glycemic control even in non-diabetic
patients. The diagnosis of diabetes per se does not seem to be related with an
adverse prognosis in acute HF. Nevertheless, a relative higher A1c seems to be
related with a lower mortality in diabetic patients. These data call action to a
thoughtful investigation in this area. Additionally, similarly to obesity and
dyslipidemia, it raises the question of a possible diabetes paradox effect in
patients with HF.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP423
EP424
Glycemic control improves in patients with diabetes type 1 after
transition from pediatric to adult care
Ivana Kraljevic, Maja Baretic & Ivana Pavlic Renar
Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb,
Croatia.
Aim
The aim of the study was to compare HbA1c levels in patients with type 1
diabetes  before  and
3 months  after  the  transition  from  pediatric  to  adult
endocrinology clinic.
Methods
Retrospective analysis of the data from 88 young adults with type 1 diabetes was
done. The consecutive patients were recruited in their last year of pediatric care
and then transferred to the adult endocrinologist care. A group of 25 randomly
chosen patients underwent structured 5-days educational program through group
classes while 63 patients underwent usual care. We compared glycemic control
using HbA1c levels before and 3 months after the transition in both groups.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
Median age of participants was 25 (17-42) years. Median HbA1c level at the time
of transition was 7.5% (5.3-11.4). After 3 months median HbA1c of the whole
group was 7.3% (5-10.8), PZ0.036. Two subgroups of patients did not differ in
age, HbA1c levels before (7.2% (5.3-11.4) vs 8.2% (5.9-10), PZ0.184) and 3
months after transition (7.3 (5-10.8) vs 7.3 (5.5-9.4), PZ0.587). Nevertheless,
patients  in  the  group  with  structured  educational  program  had  significant
improvement in glycemic control 3 months after the transition (8.2% (5.9-10) vs
7.3
(5.5-9.4), PZ0.036), while the other group with usual care did not improve
the HbA1c level significantly.
Conclusion
Structured educational program significantly improves the glycemic control in
patients with type 1 diabetes in transition period.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP424
EP425
Patients with impaired fasting glucose exhibit a more frequent
non-dipper or riser blood pressure pattern compared with
normoglycemic patients
Jose Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1, Carmen Maria Cortes-Salazar2, Juan Jose de
la Cruz-Troca3, Juan Antonio García-Arnés4 & Pedro Aranda-Lara5
1Endocrinology Department, Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital,
Malaga, Spain;2Badolatosa Primary Care Centre, Seville, Spain;
3Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Autonomous
University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain;4Endocrinology Department,
Carlos Haya University Hospital, Malaga, Spain;5Nephrology Department,
Carlos Haya University Hospital, Malaga, Spain.
Objectives
To study blood pressure circadian pattern in patients with impaired fasting
glucose (IFG) evaluated with ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM).
Methods
Cross-sectional study evaluating patients taken from the Spanish ABPM Registry.
Normoglycemia was defined as glucose !100 mg/dl and IFG as glucose 100-
125 mg/dl. All patients underwent 24-h ABPM with a Spacelabs ambulatory
blood  pressure  system.  ABPM  was  performed  according  to  standardized
conditions and conventional threshold for ABP measurements.
Results
A total of 24 708 patients were included in the study; 16 587 with normoglycemia
(67.2%) and 8.121 with IFG (32.8%). Patients with IFG were older (60.2 vs 56.0
years, PZ0.001) more obese (BMI 29.6 vs 28.2 kg/m2, PZ0.001), presented
more elevated clinic systolic blood pressure (150.4 vs 147.3 mmHg) but similar
diastolic blood pressure (87.8 vs 87.7). Non-dipper C riser pattern was found in
51.3% of patients with IFG and in 48.2% in those with normoglycemia (P!0.001
for the comparison).
Conclusions
Patients with IFG show a higher percentage of non-dipper C riser pattern in the
circadian blood pressure evaluation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP425
EP426
Diagnostic and therapeutic stratagies in maturity onset diabetes of the
young
Sofia Oliveira1,2, Celestino Neves1,2, César Esteves1,2, Duarte Pignatelli1,2
& Davide Carvalho1,3
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism of Centro
Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Instituto de Investiga
¸ão e Inovaça˜o em Saúde,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Background
Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) has an estimated prevalence of
1-5% in the diabetic population, but misdiagnosis as type 1 or type 2 diabetes is
common.  It  comprises  a  heterogeneous  group  of  monogenic  diseases
characterized by primary dysfunction of b cell, young onset, autosomal dominant
inheritance, without autoimmunity and without ketosis. Early diagnosis remains a
challenge  with  important  future  implications,  since  it  allows  treatment
optimization, prognosis definition and genetic counseling of family members.
Objective
Characterize the parameters for the diagnosis of MODY.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Patients and methods
We studied nine cases in three successive generations of a family of 12 elements,
with assessment of age at diagnosis, gender distribution, clinical manifestations,
initial treatment and subsequent need for insulin. We analyzed the levels of
glucose, HbA1c, C-peptide, the presence of ketosis and anti-b cell antibodies.
Molecular analysis of GCK (glucokinase) and HNF-1a (hepatocyte nuclear factor
1a) genes was performed to detect MODY mutations.
Results
The age at diagnosis was 26.1G8.2 years (16-38 years), 67% females, with a
disease duration of 12.7G10.6 years. Glucose levels were 200G48 mg/dl, HbA1c
8.5G1.5%. All patients had glucosuria. Four (44.4%) patients had nephropathy
with albumin excretion rate of 215G48 mg/min; 6 (66.7%) had non-proliferative
retinopathy. C-peptide levels were 2.5G1.1 ng/ml. The anti-b cell antibodies
were negative in all patients and none had ketosis (no ketonuria and indetectable
b-hydroxybutyrate). Genetic testing revealed a mutation in exon 6 (stop mutation
Ser 371 OCH) of gene HNF-1a (MODY3). Only 2 (22.2%) patients, diagnosed
at 16 and 19 years, required insulin therapy, at 32 and 25 years respectively.
The  remaining
7
(77.8%)  patients  kept  up  with  glibenclamide  treatment
(2.5-15 mg/day).
Conclusion
The  clinical  presentation  of  hyperglycemia  without  ketosis,  no  anti-b  cell
antibodies and C-peptide levels allowed to exclude type 1 diabetes. Genetic
testing enabled to confirm mutations in gene HNF-1a and guide treatment
according to clinical evolution.
Keywords: MODY, type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, HNF1a, GCK
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP426
EP427
Characterization of a pediatric population with type 1 diabetes at
transition to adult health care
Joana Oliveira1,4, Mariana Domingues3, Sandra Belo1,4, Joana
Serra Caetano2, Rita Cardoso2, Isabel Dinis2, Nanci Baptista2,
Paula Freitas1,4, Davide Carvalho1,4 & Alice Mirante2
1Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department, Centro Hospitalar
de São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal;2Endocrinology Unit of the Pediatric Hospital,
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;3Pediatric
Hospital - Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;
4Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;5Instituto de
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an important endocrine disease in the pediatric age
group. The shift from pediatrics to adult health care providers is a critical period
for adolescents with diabetes.
Objective
Characterization of a pediatric population with T1D moved to adult health care
between January/2001-April/2015.
Methods
Cross-sectional study with retrospective analysis of medical records.
Results
We evaluated 195 patients, 82 girls (42.1%) with a mean age of 7.94G3.40 years
at diagnosis. Follow-up time was 9.50G3.50 years, with a mean number of visits
of
30.60G11.40. At transition, the mean age was 17.96G0.93 years, with
10.03G3.56 years of disease. Mean BMI was 23.63G3.32 kg/m2 (SDS 0.74G
1.01), with overweight in 57 (29.2%) and obesity in 8 patients (4.1%). Mean A1c
in the last appointment was 8.7G1.6%; 47 patients (23.6%) had an A1c value
!7.5% and 71 (36.4%) O9%. At transition time, 113 (57.9%) patients were
treated with functional insulin therapy and
20
(10.3%) were on continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII). Insulin dose on last visit was 1.00G0.25
UI/kg. During follow-up, 184 (94.3%) patients reached the mean final height of
167.50G9.22 cm (SDS K0.47G1.09). Of these, only 6 (3.3%) did not reach the
target height. It was found a decrease in mean height SDS on last appointment
when compared with the first visit, in both sexes - male: 0.04G1.05 v. K0.54G
0.96; P!0.001; female: 0.25G1.07 vs K0.46G1.22; P!0.001.
Conclusion
The age of T1D diagnosis is coincident with the age group with the highest
incidence reported in the literature. Overweight found in 30% of patients may
reflect the global trend towards weight gain. The recommended target of A1c was
achieved by 23.6% of patients, despite 68.2% being on CSII and functional
insulin therapy. Like other studies, the mean height SDS decreased during follow-
up, suggesting an impaired growth, although there seems to be no impact on the
final height.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP427
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP428
Waist circumference and diabetes risk in Colombian population
Monica Zambrano & Richard Buendia
Colsubsidio, Bogota, Colombia.
Increased waist circumference is a cardiovascular risk factor, currently we have
the cutoff value of International Diabetes Federation (IDF) or by Latin-American
standards; in Colombia has not studies where showing the relationship between
increased waist circumference and the risk of diabetes. This study aims to show
the relationship between increased waist circumference by IDF criteria or Latin-
American criteria and the risk of diabetes.
Methodology
Cross-sectional study where multivariate analysis was performed using two
models: waist circumference increased by IDF criteria and waist circumference
by Latin-American criteria and risk of diabetes; adjusted for age, sex, HDL
cholesterol, and body mass index (relevant variables in univariate analysis).
Results
A total of 2200 patients were included: 30.45% (670 patients) with type 2
diabetes, of which 90.72% had increased waist circumference by IDF criteria;
76.65% by Latin-American criteria. In model 1 was found as independent factors
associated with diabetes: Male gender ORZ1.30 (95%CI 1.05-1.6, PZ0.014)
and increased waist circumference by IDF criteria ORZ1.44 (95%CI 1.02-2.04,
PZ0.038); as a protective factor HDL cholesterol ORZ0.97 (95%CI 0.96-0.98,
P!0.001).
In model 2 were found: Male gender ORZ1.31 (95%CI 1.06-1.61, PZ0.01) and
increased waist circumference by Latin-American criteria ORZ1.42 (95%CI
1.12-1.79; PZ0.003); as a protective factor HDL cholesterol ORZ0.97 (95%CI
0.96-0.98, P!0.001).
Conclusion
Increased  waist  circunference  by  IDF  or  Latin-American  criteria  may  be
associated independently to the risk of diabetes in Colombian population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP428
EP429
Oral fructose does not acutely affect circulating FGF21 in mice
Maximilian Bielohuby, Mark Sommerfeld, Uwe Schwahn,
Angelika Winkel, Andreas Herling & Norbert Tennagels
R&D Diabetes Division, Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, Frankfurt,
Germany.
Impaired glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity are established hallmarks of
diabetes and it was speculated that also fructose tolerance could be impaired.
However, investigation of fructose tolerance has been hampered by the lack of
easy accessible pharmacodynamic markers. In humans, the hormone FGF21 has
recently  been  demonstrated  to  be  a  sensitive  pharmacodynamic  marker
responding to an oral fructose bolus and exhibiting a divergent secretion pattern
in obese diabetic and healthy lean subjects. Here we investigated whether FGF21
excursion after an oral fructose challenge follows the same rules in mice.
Methods
Fasted male obese ob/ob mice received an oral fructose bolus (1 g/kg, nZ10).
Lean ob/- mice were gavaged with water, only (nZ10/group). Another cohort of
ob/ob mice was pre-treated with Sitagliptin (at tZK30 min, 40 mg/mouse, MSD
Sharp and Dohme) before exposure to oral fructose (‘ob/ob-S’, nZ10). Blood was
collected at timepoints K30, 0, 30, 60, 120 and 180 min after fructose or vehicle
treatment for analysis of glucose, plasma insulin, GLP-1 and FGF21.
Results
ob/ob  mice  displayed  higher  plasma  insulin  when  compared  to  lean  mice
(P!0.001). Sitagliptin pre-treated ob/ob mice had significantly higher GLP-1
concentrations compared to ob/ob mice without pre-treatment (P!0.05). Similar
to humans, the oral fructose bolus did not significantly change blood glucose
concentrations between 0-180 min (e.g. at tZ30 min; ob/-: 8.1G0.2 mmol/l;
ob/ob:
9.5G1.4 mmol/l;  ob/ob-S:  11.9G2.0 mmol/l).  Throughout  the  study,
ob/ob mice (independent of pre-treatment) showed significantly higher FGF21
concentrations compared to ob/- mice (e.g. at tZ30 min; ob/-: 317G108 pg/ml;
ob/ob: 2268G330 pg/ml; ob/ob-S: 2071G298 pg/ml). However, plasma FGF21
concentrations were not significantly affected by oral fructose ingestion in lean
and obese mice at all timepoints.
Conclusion
In mice, circulating FGF21 was not responsive to an oral fructose load, at least
under the conditions studied. Thus, the oral fructose tolerance test with the
pharmacodynamic readout FGF21 cannot be easily translated from humans to
laboratory rodents.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP429
EP430
Changes in the expression level of transcription factor Foxp3 in rat’s
pancreatic lymph nodes under streptozotocin-induced diabetes and
metformin administration
Alex Kamyshny & Denis Putilin
Zaporizhzhya State Medical University, Zaporizhzhya, Ukraine.
Introduction
Type 1 diabetes mellitus is a T-cell mediated autoimmune disease characterized
by the destruction of b-cells of the pancreas. Numerous studies have demonstrated
the key role of FoxP3C regulatory T-cells in the development of type 1 diabetes.
Aim
The aim of research: 1) to determine the expression patterns of transcription factor
FoxP3 in the pancreatic lymph node cells in animal model of diabetes mellitus
and 2) to assay an effect of metformin of these processes.
Methods
Researches are made on Wistar rats. For an induction of diabetes streptozotocin
was used in doses 50 mg/kg. Structure of population of FoxP3C cells has been
studied by the analysis of serial histological sections using the method of indirect
immunofluorescense with monoclonal antibodies to FoxP3 of rat.
Results
Development of experimental streptozotocin-induced diabetes mellitus (3-week
ESIDM) led to a change in representation of FoxP3C-lymphocytes in paracortical
zone and medullary cords of pancreatic lymph nodes (PLN), in which the total
density decreased by 25% (P!0.05) and 28% (P!0.05) as compared to control
group. Indicators in the group of rats with 5-week ESIDM decreased by 50%
(P!0.05) only in medullary cords of PLN. After the administration of metformin
in rats with 3-week ESIDM total density of FoxP3C-lymphocytes increased by
96% (P!0.05) in the paracortical area and by 93% (P!0.05) in medullary cords
PLN rats with respect to 3-week ESIDM. The fluorescence intensity of FoxP3C-
cells appeared to be a significant increased in medullary cords PLN as at 3-week
ESIDM and at 5-week ESIDM, namely FoxP3C-medium and small lymphocytes.
Administration of metformin resulted in a decrease in medullary cords PLN
concentration FoxP3 in FoxP3C-medium and small lymphocytes with respect to
indicators of a group of animals with a
3-week ESIDM that did not take
metformin.
Conclusions
Our results demonstrate the metformin is able to increase the Treg number in
PLN, by the way these effects manifest on the third week of the diabetes mellitus
and they reduce of the fifth week of the pathological process duration.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP430
EP431
Diabetic case treated by steroid
Hussam Abusahmin, Rao Bondugulapati & Antony Dixon
Wrexham Maelor Hospital, Wrexham, UK.
Introduction
Isolated eosinophilic pancreatitis is very rare disease and usually occurs either as
hyperoesinophylia syndrome or as part of eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Case report
A 55-year-old man presented to his general practitioner (GP) with a 3 week
history  of flu-like  symptoms,  pruritis,  weight  loss  and  diarrhoea.  Initial
investigations showed eosinophilia (32.2 !109/l) and a normal random glucose.
He was seen in a general medical clinic 3 weeks after the initial referral from GP
and at this point had polyuria and polydipsia. He was previously well and was on
no medication. He denied illicit drug abuse. There had been no recent travel
abroad. Physical examination was unremarkable.
Further investigations showed elevated random blood glucose (15.9 mmol/l),
raised HbA1c (89 mmol/mol), raised creatinine (171 mmol/l). There were no ova,
cysts and parasites in urine or stool. Plasma virology, parasitology and vasculitis
screen were negative. A cytogenetic analysis test and F1P1L1-PDGFRA (to rule
out eosinophilic leukaemia) was also negative. Computerised Tomography (CT)
of chest and abdomen showed a bulky pancreas.
In the context of previous finding, the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus secondary to
eosinophilic pancreatitis was established and he was commenced initially on
insulin, then prednisolone (40 mg/day). After starting steroids, the eosinophil
count fell and insulin requirements decreased. After 2 months, the eosinophilic
count was normal and insulin was stopped. Steroids were weaned off over the next
8 weeks. The patient has been off all the treatment for the last 8 months with
eosinophil  counts  just  above  the  normal  range  and  the  latest  HbA1c  of
48 mmol/mol.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
We presented a rare case of eosinophilic pancreatitis as part of hyper-eosinophilic
syndrome  with minimal involvement  of  other  systems.  This was a unique
situation in which steroids, which usually cause hyperglycaemia, were effectively
used to treat diabetes mellitus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP431
EP432
Predictive value of risk factors for the progression from prediabetes to
type 2 diabetes
Tsvetalina Tankova, Nevena Chakarova, Lilya Dakovska, Iliana Atanassova
& Georgi Kirilov
Department of Diabetology, Clinical Center of Endocrinology,
Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Background
Diabetes and prediabetes have become major public health problems in recent
decades.
Objectives
The aim of the study was to evaluate the predictive value of risk factors on
progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes.
Materials and methods
A total of 383 subjects (213 females, 170 males), mean age 51.93G13.47 years
and mean BMI 29.11G5.3 kg/m2, divided in three groups - 147 with normal
glucose tolerance, 122 with impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and 114 with impaired
glucose tolerance (IGT), were included in the study and were followed-up a year
later. OGTT was performed in all participants; categories of glucose tolerance
were  defined  according  to
2006  WHO  criteria.  Anthropometric,  laboratory
parameters (HbA1c, lipids, hsCRP, insulin, proinsulin), blood pressure, body fat
mass and FINDRISC were assessed.
Results
Progression rates from IFG and IGT to diabetes over 1 year were 12.08 and 19.91
per 100 person-years, respectively. Baseline determinants of progression from
IFG to diabetes were age, HbA1c, systolic blood pressure, lack of daily fruit and
vegetable intake, FINDRISC, hsCRP; and from IGT to diabetes - overweight and
obesity (BMI), waist circumference, HbA1c, lack of daily fruit and vegetable
intake. Baseline insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) appeared to be a predictor for the
progression from both IFG and IGT to diabetes, while basal insulin secretion
(HOMA-%B) - a predictor for the progression from IGT to diabetes. Baseline
proinsulin level and proinsulin:insulin ratio were independent predictors for
progression to diabetes in both IFG and IGT.
Conclusions
Individuals with IFG or IGT identified through high-risk strategies in Bulgarian
population, have a rather high risk of developing diabetes within one year.
Overweight and obesity, waist circumference, systolic blood pressure, lack of
daily fruit and vegetable intake, insulin resistance appear to be significant
determinants of progression to diabetes, which implies for adequate measures for
their control aiming at prevention of the disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP432
EP433
Cause-of-death trends for diabetes mellitus over 20 years
Sunghwan Suh1, Mi-Kyung Kim2, Mi-Kyoung Park1 & Duk Kyu Kim1
1Dong-A University College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea;
2Keimyung University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
Background
Recently, diabetic mortality is lower than ever before, likely due to dramatic
improvements in diabetes care. This study set to analyze changes in the cause of
death in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in the past 20 years.
Methods
All subjects were T2DM patients over the age of 30 whose death certificates were
issued at six hospitals in the Busan metropolitan area from 2010 to 2014. The
patients were excluded if they had been clinically diagnosed with significant
tuberculosis, liver, thyroid, renal, connective tissue diseases and cancers, prior to
T2DM diagnosis. We classified the cause of death into several groups. The results
were compared with our published data on the period from 1990 to 1994 and 2000
to 2004.
Results
The study comprised 680 patients of which 61.7% were male. The average age of
death was 66.5 years. The most common cause of death was malignancy (47.7%),
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
followed by renal disease (14.0%), infectious disease (10.6%), cardiovascular
disease
(8.5%).  Compared  with  previous  studies,  cancer  became  the  most
common cause of death in T2DM patients, while cardiovascular disease and
infectious disease significantly decreased in the rank.
Conclusion
Over the 20 years, death by cancer in T2DM patients was is rising steeply.
Preventive strategies to promote primary prevention and early detection of
malignancy are urgently needed to reduce this excess mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP433
EP434
The part of taste in cephalic phase of insulin secretion
Hana Pospíšilová, Michaela Dušková, Hana Jandíková, Monika Sˇ rámková,
Michal Macourek & Luboslav Stárka
Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background
Secretion of insulin by beta-cells of the islets of Langerhans is a very complex
dynamic process that includes basal and stimulated insulin secretion. Two phases,
one early and one late, can be distinguished in insulin secretion. The early phase is
characterised by the secretion of preformed insulin granules, lasts about 15 min
and is formed by cephalic and gastrointestinal components. The cephalic phase of
insulin secretion starts by stimulating visual, olfactory and taste receptors.
The aim of this study is to show to what extent the concentrations of insulin,
C-peptide and cortisol are changed by a simple mouth rinsing with a sucrose or
sweetener solution.
Methods
Fifteen non-obese voluntary male participants were included in this study. The
experiment consisted of mouth rinsing with either a sucrose or aspartate solution
or pure water as a placebo. Blood was taken in short intervals of 0, 5, 10 and
20 min. Blood glucose, C-peptide, insulin and cortisol were determined.
ANOVA was used for statistical analysis.
Results
C-peptide and glucose were unaffected, a short-term increase in insulin was
observed after the sucrose, but not after the aspartate or placebo. The decline of
cortisol level within 20 min was also observed after aspartate or placebo, it was
probably caused by stress factors or anticipation.
In conclusion, we proved the contribution of taste to the cephalic phase of insulin
secretion.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP434
EP435
Relation between uric acid and lipid profiles in patients with type 2
diabetes
Eui-Hyun Kim1, Kwi-Hyun Bae2, Jae-Han Jeon2, Yeon-Kyung Choi2,
Mi-Kyung Kim3, Hye-Soon Kim3, Keun-Gyu Park2 & Hyun-Ae Seo1
1Departments of Internal Medicine, Daegu Fatima Hospital, Daegu,
Republic of Korea;2Departments of Internal Medicine, Kyungpook
National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea;
3Departments of Internal Medicine, Keimyung University School of
Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
Aims
High level of uric acid is known to associate with stroke, coronary artery disease
and metabolic syndrome. Some epidemiologic studies suggested that high uric
acid level is connected with dyslipidemia. However, this relationship was not
examined in type 2 diabetic patients. This study was conducted to investigate the
association between serum uric acid level and lipid profiles in type 2 diabetic
patients.
Methods
A total of 972 type 2 diabetes patients were included in the present study. We
measured height, body weight and blood pressure. Biochemical parameters
including  low  density  lipoprotein
(LDL),  high  density  lipoprotein
(HDL),
triglyceride (TG) and total cholesterol (TC) were checked.
Result
The mean age of total subjects was 56.90G13.91 and men were 507 (52.2%). The
mean body mass index (BMI) was 23.89G3.88. In the univariate analysis, TG and
uric acid level was significantly positively correlated (rZ0.155, P!0.001). HDL
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
was  significantly  negatively  associated  with  serum  uric  acid
(rZK0.171,
P!0.001). LDL and TC were not related with uric acid level. Multiple regression
analyses were then performed by adjusting for age, sex and body mass index. The
significantly positive association between TG and uric acid was retained (beta
coefficientZ0.131, P!0.001). The negative connection between HDL and uric
acid was persisted (beta coefficientZK0.111, PZ0.001).
Conclusion
In the present study, we found that serum uric acid level is significantly positively
associated with TG, whereas it is significantly inversely associated with HDL in
type 2 diabetic patients. Management for hyperuricemia may help to control
dyslipidemia in patients with type 2 diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP435
EP436
Thyroid dysfunction among Greek type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients
attending an outpatient clinic
Maria Barmpari, Maria Kokkorou, Anastasia Micheli, Irene Alexiou,
Elefteria Spanou, Marina Noutsou & Anastasia Thanopoulou
Diabetes Clinic, 2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Hippokratio General
Hospital oh Athens, Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of thyroid dysfunction in
Greek patients with type 1 (T1DM) and type 2 (T2DM) diabetes as well as its
possible relation to glycemic control and to diabetic complications.
Patients and methods
A total of 990 patients (60.7% men) with T1DM or T2DM, consecutively
followed in the Outpatient Diabetes Clinic, participated in the study. In every
patient anthropometric and biochemical measurements, occurrence of diabetes
complications and classical comorbidities were assessed. Average HbA1c of the
previous year was calculated. Moreover, the well-being of every patient was
determined, using a scale from 1 to 10. All the above parameters were compared
between subjects with or without thyroid disease.
Results
All 990 patients were euthyroid at the time of the study, either on thyroid
medications or not. 13% of them had T1DM and 87% T2DM. Mean age of T1DM
patients: 47.5 years and of T2DM patients: 67.6 years. Mean duration of diabetes:
23.6 years and 16.1 years respectively. The prevalence of hypothyroidism in
T1DM patients was 43.8% vs 23.5% in T2DM patients (P!0.05). The prevalence
of nodular goiter in T1DM patients was 17.5% vs 32.1% (PZ0.05) in T2DM
patients. Moreover, T2DM patients with hypothyroidism compared to matched
patients without, had higher HbA1C: 7.41% vs 6.97% (P!0.01), higher total
cholesterol 181.4 mg/dl versus 164 mg/dl (P!0.001) and higher HDL 51 mg/dl
vs 46 mg/dl (P!0.005). T2DM patients without hypothyroidism had a better
wellness feeling compared to the patients with hypothyroidism: 7.5
vs 5.3
(P!0.001).
Conclusions
Screening for thyroid disease among patients with type 2 diabetes should be
routinely considered because of the high prevalence of thyroid dysfunction in
these patients. It is another risk factor that if remains undiagnosed could aggravate
the usual comorbidities of diabetes mellitus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP436
EP437
Study on role of TNF-a and oxidative stress in pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes mellitus
Talat Saatov, Zafar Ibragimov, Sanobarxon Irgasheva, Elvira Ibragimova,
Bakhodir Zainutdinov & Mukhammadjon Mustafakulov
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Uzbekistan Academy of Sciences,
Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Aim
The work was initiated to study TNF-a gene polymorphism and parameters of
oxidative stress in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Materials and methods
We examined 41 healthy subjects and 20 patients with diabetes mellitus to study
G308A (rs1800629) polymorphism in TNF-a gene by means of allele-specific
PCR method (AS-PCR). Rates of lipid peroxidation (LP) were determined by
concentration of malon dialdehyde (MDA); catalase activity was assessed by
antioxidant protection degree.
Results
Excessive production of TNF-a is known as a pathological link in diabetes
mellitus onset and progression. In our study, frequency of GG, GA and DD in
patients with diabetes mellitus was 85.0, 15 and 0.0, respectively. Frequency of
GG, GA and AA genotypes in the control group was 90.2, 9.8 and 0.0%,
respectively.  Frequency  of  A-allele,  the  one  associated  with  the  increased
production of TNF-a, in the diabetics and healthy volunteers was 7.5 and 4.9%,
respectively.  Our  findings  demonstrated  significant  LP  intensification  with
accumulation of secondary products in the blood serum of all patients with
diabetes mellitus (MDA concentrations increased by 2.5 times), and suppression
of activity of catalase more than by two times in the diabetics as compared with
the controls.
Conclusions
In patients with diabetes mellitus frequency of a mutant A-allele in TNF-a gene is
higher than in healthy persons. Our findings indicate significant role of G308A
polymorphism in TNF-a gene in pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus. In patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus we have managed to establish correlation between
intensity of oxidative stress and TNF-a production.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP437
EP438
The change of adherence to a process quality-of-care-indicator after the
initiation of clinical audit in Korea
Soo-Kyung Kim1, Se-Hwa Kim2, Kyung Do Han3, Eun-Mi Kim4,
Jin-Sook Cho4, Seok O Park5, Tea Sun Park6 & Yong-Wook Cho1
1Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, Seongnam, Republic of Korea;
2Catholic Kwandong University, Incheon, Republic of Korea;3College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea;
4Health Insurance Review & Assessment Service, Wonju, Republic of
Korea;5Kwangmyung Sungae Hosiptal, Gwangmyeong, Republic of Korea;
6Chonbuk National University Hospital, Chonbuk National University
Medical School, Jeonju, Republic of Korea.
Background
Adherence to recommended guideline for monitoring of glucose control and
screening of diabetic complications has been demonstrated to prevent the chronic
complications of diabetes. In Korea, the clinical audit for quality of diabetes care
has been started in 2011. The aim of this study is to investigate the change of
adherence to a process quality-of-care-indicator in diabetes after the initiation of
audit in Korea.
Methods
This retrospective study was performed using the national health insurance claims
database from the Health Insurance Review & Assessment Service (HIRA) of
Korea, from 2009 to 2014. Study patients were aged 30 years or older, had type 2
diabetes, had taking at least one hypoglycemic agent in only one attending clinic
at
2009, and had no history of any diabetes-related  chronic  complications
including cardiovascular diseases before December, 2010, cancer, or hospital-
ization for R 90 days (nZ280,698). Process indicators included measurement of
HbA1c more than once a year, annual measurement of lipid, annual examination
for retinopathy and nephropathy.
Results
The number of patients receiving HbA1c and lipid measurement at least once a
year increased to 69.9 and 54.5% in 2014 from 52.7 and 32.5% in 2009. Although
the annual screening of nephropathy and retinopathy is also increased gradually, it
is still low at 16.5 and 24.5% in 2014. Despite a gradual increase in the proportion
of patients who underwent annual measurement of HbA1c and lipid and annual
screening for retinopathy and nephropathy, only 6.1% of the patients met all four
criteria in 2014 (1.5% in 2009 and 3.9% in 2011).
Conclusion
Although there were improvements in adherence to each process quality-of-care
indicator, the percentage of patients undergoing all four examinations annually
remained still very low.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP438
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP439
The effect of processes measures of diabetes care and medication
adherence on the developments of chronic diabetic complications
Soo-Kyung Kim1, Se-Hwa Kim2, Kyung Do Han3, Eun-Mi Kim4,
Jin-Sook Cho4, Seok O Park5, Tae Sun Park6 & Yong-Wook Cho1
1CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, Seongnam, Republic of
Korea;2Catholic Kwandong University, Incheon, Republic of Korea;
3College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of
Korea;4Health Insurance Review & Assessment Service, Wonju, Republic
of Korea;5Kwangmyung Sungae Hosiptal, Gwangmyeong, Republic of
Korea;6Chonbuk National University Hospital, Chonbuk National
University Medical School, Jeonju, Republic of Korea.
Background
Regular monitoring of glucose control and screening of diabetic complication and
adherence  to  treatment  are  cornerstones  for  prevention  of  chronic  diabetic
complications. The aim of this study is to investigate the association between
quality of diabetes care and the development of chronic diabetes complications.
Methods
This retrospective study was performed using the national health insurance claims
database from the Health Insurance Review & Assessment Service (HIRA) of
Korea. Study patients were aged 30 years or older, had type 2 diabetes, had taking
at least one hypoglycemic agent in only one attending clinic at 2009, and had no
history of any diabetes-related chronic complications including cardiovascular
diseases  before  December
2010,  cancer,  or  hospitalization  for  R90
days
(nZ280 698). Patients who measured HbA1c and lipid profile at least once a year
every year and had R80% of the possession rate of oral hypoglycemic medication
every year from 2009 to 2014 were compared with those who did not.
Results
The number of patients receiving two quality-of-care measures at least once a
year increased to 52.5% in 2014 from 30.3% in 2009. Those having R80% of the
medication adherence also increased from 60.3 to 73.5%. However, the patients
who meet both conditions every year during study period were only 13 625
(4.9%).  In  them,  the  cumulative  incidence  of  microvascular  complications
(nephropathy and retinopathy) was 4.1%, and that of macrovascular compli-
cations (myocardial and cerebral infarction and peripheral arterial disease) was
0.8%, (4.8 and 1.5%, respectively in those who did not).
Conclusions
The proportion of patients who received two quality-of-care measures and had
R80% of the medication possession rate every year are seriously low, but they
experienced fewer diabetic macrovascular complications. This result provides
support for the importance for enhancing the quality of diabetes care.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP439
EP440
The effect of vitamin D on rat pancreatic beta cells in vitro
Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou1,2, Eustathia Papageorgiou2,
Ioannis Vlachodimitris2, Christos Markopoulos3, Theodoros Karatzas3 &
Michael Koutsilieris3
1Department of Endocrinology, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece;
2Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens,
Greece;3Second Propedeutic Department of Surgery, Laiko Hospital,
Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Vitamin D is currently known for its effects on the bone and muscle systems as
well as for its pleiotropic and antiproliferative effects. The relationship between
vitamin D and diabetes mellitus is in the focus of scientific research. Vitamin D
deficiency has been found to be associated with the development of diabetes
mellitus type 1 as well as with poor glycemic control in diabetes mellitus type 2.
Aim
The aim was to study the effect of vitamin D on the proliferation of rat pancreatic
beta cells in vitro.
Methods
The effect of 1,25(OH)2D3 (Sigma-Aldrich) at an initial concentration of 100 nM
on INS-1 rat pancreatic beta cells was studied in vitro. INS-1 rat pancreatic beta
cells were incubated for 48 h at a temperature of 378C in a humidified atmosphere
of 5% CO2 in the presence and absence of 1,25(OH)2D3. INS-1 rat beta cells were
incubated with progressively decreasing concentrations of 1,25(OH)2D3, at an
initial concentration of 100 nM (range 100-3.125 nM) to assess the proliferation
of INS-1 rat beta cells. The proliferation of INS-1 rat beta cells was assessed using
the XTT cell proliferation assay (AppliChem). In order to determine the number
of viable cells the cell proliferation kit XTT employs 2,3-Bis-(2-methoxy-4-nitro-
5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide salt (XTT). Only in living cells
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
mitochondria are capable to reduce XTT to form an orange colored water soluble
dye. Therefore, the concentration of the dye is proportional to the number of
metabolically active cells.
Results
1,25(OH)2D3 was found to reduce the proliferation of INS-1 rat beta cells in vitro.
Conclusions
Vitamin D was found to modulate the proliferation of rat pancreatic beta cells
in vitro. Similarly, Blauer et al. (Pancreatology 2015) have recently found that
vitamin D in physiologically attainable and clinically relevant concentrations
reduces the proliferation of pancreatic stellate cells in vitro.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP440
EP441
The effect of melatonin on rat pancreatic beta cells in vitro
Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou1,2, Eustathia Papageorgiou2,
Ioannis Vlachodimitris2, Christos Markopoulos3, Theodoros Karatzas3 &
Michael Koutsilieris2
1Department of Endocrinology, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece;
2Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens,
Greece;3Second Propedeutic Department of Surgery, “Laiko” Hospital,
Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Melatonin is a hormone mainly synthesized and secreted by the pineal gland. It is
involved in the orchestration of circadian rhythms its levels being elevated during
the hours of darkness in the human. Melatonin may have other pleiotropic
functions in the human organism. In particular, it may be involved in the
regulation of glucose metabolism and the pathogenesis of diabetes.
Aim
The aim was to study the effect of melatonin on rat islet cells in vitro.
Methods
Rat pancreatic beta cells INS-1 were incubated for 48 h at 378C in a humified
atmosphere 5% CO2 in the presence and absence of melatonin (Sigma-Aldrich).
Melatonin was used at decreasing concentrations, the initial concentration being
200 nM, range (200-6.25 nM). The proliferation of INS-1 rat beta cells was
assessed  using  the  XTT  cell  proliferation  assay
(AppliChem).  In  order  to
determine the number of viable cells the cell proliferation kit XTT employs 2,3-
Bis-(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide  salt
(XTT). Only in living cells mitochondria are capable to reduce XTT to form an
orange colored water soluble dye. Therefore, the concentration of the dye is
proportional to the number of metabolically active cells.
Results
Melatonin was not found to influence beta cells proliferation in vitro.
Conclusions
Melatonin, a pineal hormone involved in the regulation of circadian rhythms is
now being investigated for its effects on glucose regulation. It has been found in
human genome wide association studies that genetic variations in the melatonin
receptor MT2 encoded by MTNR1B may coexist with diabetes. It was also
suggested that genetic variations of MTNR1B may disorder b-cell function
directly, via its effects on insulin secretion. In the present study melatonin was not
found to affect islet cell mass in vitro. As it is speculated that melatonin and its
receptors may be a new therapeutic avenue in diabetes further studies are needed
to assess the effect of melatonin on insulin secretion.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP441
EP442
Implementation of guidelines in a large outpatient Diabetes Clinic
Maria Kokkorou, Maria Barmpari, Anastasia Micheli, Irene Alexiou,
Elefteria Spanou, Marina Noutsou & Anastasia Thanopoulou
Diabetes Clinic, 2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Hippokratio General
Hospital oh Athens, Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
The aim of the study is to determine whether the guidelines on glycemic control
and cardiovascular risk factors are being followed in everyday clinical practice
and to describe the lifestyle habits and the wellbeing of patients with Type1 or
Type 2 diabetes.
Patients and methods
A total of 990 patients with diabetes consecutively followed in the Outpatient
Diabetes Clinic were studied (60.8% men). Clinical and laboratory parameters
and living habits were evaluated. Wellbeing was assessed by a scale from 1 to 10.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Results
Of the 990 patients, 12.5% had Type1, while 87.5% had Type2 diabetes. Mean
age:
47.5 and 67.6 years, mean duration of diabetes:
23.6
and 16.1 years
respectively.
Type 1
Type 2
Parameters
Target
Mean
% on target
Mean
% on target
HbA1c (%)
!7
7.45
30.9
6.98
52.4
Systolic BP
!140
110
98.4
120
95.9
(mmHg)
Diastolic BP
!80
62.5
99.2
70.0
96.4
(mmHg)
BMI (kg/m2)
!25
25.9
40.8
28.78
18.1
HDL (mg% _)
O40
50.0
88.4
43.0
64.5
HDL (mg% \)
O50
63.0
76.1
50.0
50.0
LDL (mg%;
!70
73.0
75.0
89.3
20.0
with CVD)
LDL (mg%;
!100
100.3
57.4
94.5
63.3
without CVD)
Tg (mg%)
!150
79.0
91.2
113
70.6
eGFR (ml/min
O90
108.8
68.1
81.8
39.9
per 1.73 m2)
Hypoglycemia
No
18.6
67.0
Exercise (150
Yes
49.1
52.3
min/week)
Smoking
No
72.6
83.6
Wellbeing
O5
7
89.4
7
90.7
Conclusions
Our study suggests that most of diabetic patients achieve the glycemic as well as
CVD risk factors and lifestyle targets, but there is still considerable potential for
improvement of the guidelines implementation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP442
EP443
The content of adipocytokines (resistin, adiponectin) in type 1 diabetic
patients associated with the amounts of fat component
Yuliya Dydyshka1, Alla Shepelkevich1, Alexandra Sosedkova1 &
Veronika Lobashova2
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;2Republic Medical
Rehabilitation and Balneotreatmentcenter, Minsk, Belarus.
Background and aims
Adipocytokines produced by adipose tissue cells, and their action is often
systemic in nature. Connection  of some adipocytokines
(resisttin)  with the
development of autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes (T1DM) is a
perspective view. Therefore, the aim of study was to assess the association
between adipocytokines (resisttin, adiponectin) and content of fat mass in T1DM.
Materials and methods
Ninety-five patients with T1DM (60 women, 35 males) (mean age: 30.6 (24.9-
37.5) years, duration of DM: 13 (7-20) years, age of manifestation: 17 (12-23)
years, HbA1c: 8,2 (7.6-8.9)%) and 55 (31 women, 24 men) controls. The research
involved anthropometry of patients, general clinic examination, DEXA using a
program ‘Body composition’. A fat mass index (FMI) was measured as total fat
mass/height2.
Results
There were no differences in the percentage of fat component in women with
T1DM (34.5 (29.3-38.6) vs 32.6 (26.5-37.2); UZ820; PZ0.425) and men (21.3
(17.5-28.5)% vs 23.95 (15.8-26.6)%; UZ385; PZ0.865) compared with control
groups. The trend was confirmed compare FMI- in women 7.36 (6.15-9.33) vs
6.68
(5.02-8.8) kg/m2; UZ787; PZ0.28; FMI in men 5.03 (3.26-6.55) vs 5.8
(3.37-6.79) kg/m2; UZ378; PZ0.641) in comparison to the control group. The
patients with T1DM have significantly higher than the control levels of serum
resistin - 0.46 (0.35-0.69) vs 0.37 (0.3-0.49) ng/ml; UZ581; PZ0.034. The
contents of adiponectin in patients with T1DM comparable to healthy individuals
(27.77
(27.1-28.42) vs 28.02 (27.38-28.4) ng/ml, UZ790.5; PZ0.847). There
was medium negative correlation between serum levels of resistin and FMI
(rZK0.48; PZ0.004) in women with T1DM.
Conclusions
Elevated levels of resistin may be associated with the presence of an autoimmune
process in the development of diabetes. Influence of the level of resistin on
content of fat mass in patients with T1DM needs further study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP443
EP444
Association of eating behaviors and demographic profiles of Filipino
adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus seen in a Tertiary Hospital
Anthony Harvey Aguilar1, Mark Anthony Sandoval2, Cecilia Jimeno2 &
Elizabeth Paz-Pacheco2
1Evangelista Medical Specialty Hospital, San Pedro, Laguna, The
Philippines;2University of the Philippines - Philippine General Hospital,
Manila, The Philippines.
Background
Patients with type 2 diabetes face daily challenges in making dietary choices that
are  influenced  by  eating  behaviors.  Recognition  of  eating  behaviors  and
associated demographic profiles could aid in individualizing dietary plans and
direct nutrition programs in forming cost-effective measures.
Objective
The goal of this study is to identify differences in eating behaviors across
demographic profiles of Filipinos with type 2 diabetes.
Methods
Demographic data and answers of 197 Filipinos with type 2 diabetes to the
Filipino eating behavior questionnaire were obtained and tallied. Paired t-test and
one-way ANOVA were used to compare eating behavior scores across categories
of the demographic data.
Results
Patients with type 2 diabetes who scored higher in uncontrolled eating tend to
have a higher level of education, positive family history of diabetes, and ate two
meals with no snacks per day. Those who were considered restrained eaters were
previous smokers, on insulin and oral hypoglycemic agents, and ate three meals
and a snack. Emotional eaters were observed to eat two meals with no snacks per
day while social eaters tend to be younger, employed, have higher level of
education, and family history of diabetes. High scorers in proactive eating have a
longer duration of diabetes and ate no snacks. Uncontrolled, emotional, social,
and pro-active eating domains seem to have direct relationships, while restrained
eating tends to show an inverse relationship with the other eating behaviors. The
estimated prevalence’s were 14, 14, 12, 13, and 11% for uncontrolled, restrained,
emotional, social, and pro-active eating, respectively.
Conclusion
Among patients with type 2 diabetes, eating behaviors may vary and depend
on their demographic profiles. Eating behaviors related to overeating seem to
be directly related to each other and inversely related to restrained eating.
Prevalence rate of behaviors related to overeating and restrained eating were both
relatively low.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP444
EP445
Functional characterization of a large deletion in the AVPR2 gene
causing severe nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in a Turkish family
Emel Saglar1, Beril Erdem1, Tugce Karaduman1, Merve Ozcan1,
Ferhat Deniz2 & Hatice Mergen1
1Department of Biology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey;
2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, GATA Haydarpasa
Teaching Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Changes in arginine vazopression type 2 receptor (AVPR2) gene mostly lead to a
rare hereditary polyuric disease, X-linked nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI).
The disease is characterized by the production of large amounts of urine and an
inability to concentrate urine in response to the antidiuretic hormone vasopressin.
In our previous study we have identified a novel 388 bp deletion in the AVPR2
gene in a patient with NDI and in his family. For functional analyze studies,
identified deletion was re-created by PCR based site-directed mutagenesis and
restriction fragment replacement strategy based on DNA sequence and expressed
in COS7 cells. We performed total and surface ELISA assay and cAMP assay for
assessing  the  ability  of  transfected  cells  to  produce  cAMP  in  response  to
stimulation  with  DDAVP.  Results  of functional  characterization  of
388 bp
deletion have revealed that mutant V2R did not show any expression on the cell
surface compared to the wild type receptor while showed reduced cellular
expression in total (31.93G8.8%) compared to the wild type receptor. cAMP
accumulation assay results are supported the ELISA results of the mutant receptor
protein. In conclusion we believe that our study will contribute to shedding light
on mechanisms of molecular pathology of AVPR2 deletions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP445
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP446
Microbiological profile in diabetic foot infections: identification and
susceptibility profile of bacteria isolated in 5 years in a Portuguese
tertiary care hospital
Adriana de Sousa Lages, Patrícia Oliveira, Nuno Costa e Silva,
Daniela Guelho, Luís Cardoso, Nuno Vicente, Diana Martins,
Diana Oliveira, Mara Ventura & Francisco Carrilho
Coimbra Hospital and University Center, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
The  diagnosis  of  infected  ulcer  is  mainly  clinical.  The  goals  of  the
microbiological studies are identification of the pathogen and evaluation of
susceptibility to antibiotics to minimize exposure to drugs and selection of
resistant strains.
Methods
Retrospective cohort study; Data collection: 1 January 2010 to 31 December
2014. Were included wound samples of aspirate, nonsurgical/surgical exudate,
pus from abscesses and bone fragments from diabetic foot consultation and ward
at Endocrinology Department. Data were obtained through the clinical process
and analysed in SPSS.
Results
On gender, our sample included 71.3% of male patients with age of 62.8G14
years.  Regarding  the  origin  of  the  requested  studies,
78%  were  from  the
endocrinology ward (nZ174) and 74% were samples of nonsurgical wound
exudate (nZ165).
One hundred and eighty-one samples were obtained for microbiological study
with identification of 223 different agents.
Of gram-positive agents, Staphylococcus aureus (SA) was the most isolated in
39.5% of the samples (nZ88) followed by Enterococcus faecalis (EF) in 8.97%.
Of gram-negative agents, Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) was isolated in 29
(13%) and Proteus mirabilis (PM) in 23 (10.31%). Of the 42 samples with
polymicrobial  isolation,  the  combination  of  agents  most  commonly  found
corresponded to co-infection with PA and SA (14.3%) and SA and PM (17.1%).
Regarding to antimicrobial susceptibility in SA strains, was found resistance in
35.2% to oxacillin, 39% for levofloxacin, 29% to clindamycin, 3% to gentamicin,
1% to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and there were no vancomycin or linezolid
resistance in vitro.
Conclusions
Microbiological study is essential in ulcerated lesions particularly in moderate
and severe infections. The most gram-positive isolated agent was SA and gram-
negative agent was PA. 35.2% of the SA strains were methicillin-resistant which
may be related to chronicity, recent hospitalization and previous antibiotic
therapy, factors that are frequently present in diabetic patients followed in a
tertiary care hospital.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP446
EP447
The association between the FTO gene and gestational diabetes mellitus
Selvihan Beysel1, Yunus Alp2, Ferda Alparslan Pinarli2, Erman Cakal1,
Ahmet Yesilyurt2 & Tuncay Delibasi3
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Diskapi Teaching and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Genetic Research,
Diskapi Teaching and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;3Department of
Internal Medicine, School of Medicine (Kastamonu), Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Common polymorphisms of the fat mass and obesity associated gene (FTO) is
known to associate with increased obesity and diabetes mellitus type 2. This was
the first study to investigate the association between the rs9939609 FTO gene
polymorphism and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) in Turkish women.
Patients and methods
The case-control study included 203 gestational diabetes and 191 non-diabetic
pregnant  controls.  Anthropometric  and  biochemical  measurements  were
performed. Genotyping of FTO rs9939609 was studied.
Results
GDM had significantly higher age, gestational weeks, body mass index, fasting
blood glucose, fasting insulin, HOMA-IR, HbA1c, systolic and diastolic blood
pressure; as compared to controls (P!0.05). The percentage of genotype TT
(wild, 39.9 vs 41.1%), genotype AT (40.9 vs 46.6%) and genotype AA (19.2 vs
12%) were similar between GDM and controls, respectively. Genotype AA
significantly had higher insulin and HOMA-IR than AT and TT. The FTO gene
polymorphisms was not associated with an increased risk of GDM (PZ0.05,
ORZ1.73, 95% CI 0.99-3.03).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
The FTO rs9939609 SNP was not associated with an increased risk of GDM in
women with GDM. The further studies is needed to be conducted to examine
whether these risk variants predict the development of GDM.
Table 1 Clinical and biochemical parameters according to FTO genotype
TT
AT
AA
P
Age
28.72G5.14
27.90G5.54
28.53G5.03
0.37
Gestational age (wk)
26.38G1.53
25.95G1.55
26.51G1.48
0.01
Body mass index (kg/m2)
28.67G5.77
27.16G4.42
29.63G5.40
0.002
Fasting glucose (mg/dl)
88.29G17.46
85.96G17.54
90.70G16.53
0.15
Fasting insulin (mIU/l)
9.77G4.68
9.86G3.15
12.22G4.90
0.001
HOMA-IR
2.25G1.37
2.17G1.01
2.81G1.45
0.002
HbA1c (%)
5.29G0.46
5.23G0.43
5.31G0.51
0.13
Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)
103.47G15.25
107.06G12.92
110.54G12.12
0.009
Diastolic blood pressure (mmHg)
67.85G8.71
69.07G7.19
69.67G6.35
0.30
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP447
EP448
Clinical inertia in type 2 diabetes mellitus without insulin treatment
Jo
˜o Silva, Catarina Ivo, Luis Lopes, Dolores Passos, Helder Sim
˜ es,
Mafalda Marcelino & João Jácome de Castro
Portuguese Armed Forces University Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
Clinical inertia applied to type2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) treatment, is defined
as a lack of treatment’s intensification of patients who are not in HbA1c target.
Clinical inertia leads to a postponement of new therapeutic introduction, with all
complications associated with a poor metabolic control. In Portugal there are only
studies that show good or poor metabolic control but do not mention clinician’s
attitude towards these values. Recently published international studies reveal
partial clinical inertia in 52.5% of cases and full clinical inertia in 12.8%.
Objective
To  evaluate  clinical  inertia  of  T2DM’s  treatment  in  an  Endocrinology
department.
Methods
Cross-sectional, retrospective study of a random sample of patients with non-
insulin treated T2DM, with minimum 12 months follow-up, during 2014-2015. It
was established individualized HbA1c target based on patients’ characteristics:
life expectancy,hypoglycemia, cardiovascular disease or other comorbidities.
Total clinical inertia was defined as no treatment’s intensification at every visit
and partial clinical inertia in at least one visit.
Results
We analyzed 317 patients, 73.9% male, 69.4G9.8 years, T2DM diagnosed for
11.5G8.7 years. 4.7% of patients had T2DM without treatment, 34.7% were
treated with one non-insulinic antidiabetic drug (ANI), 38.5% with two ANI,
19.6% with three ANI, 2.2% with four ANI. It was established target HbA1c of
6.5% in 13.9% of patients; 7% in 48.9%; 7.5% in 30.9%; 8% in 5.6%. One
hundred and twelve patients (35.3%) had HbA1c above target in at least one visit.
Of these, there was total clinical inertia in 2.7% and partial inertia in 38.3%.
HbA1c value was 0.1-0.5% higher than target in 65.6%; 0.6-1.0% in 17%; O1%
at 13.8%. In subsequent visit, 43.8% recovered their HbA1c target, 38.1% had
therapeutic intensification and 28.1% remained with clinical inertia.
Conclusion
The value of clinical inertia in our service was lower than described in literature
and was associated with HbA1c values close to established target.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP448
EP449
Stress hyperglycemia ratio as a marker of disease severity in
hospitalized patients with acute pyelonephritis
Francisco Sousa Santos1, Margarida Fonseca2, Ana Pa˜osinho2, Inês Cruz2,
Joa˜o Sequeira Duarte1, Clotilde Gouveia1, Alberto Mello e Silva2 &
Carlos Vasconcelos1
1Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental - Endocrinology, Lisbon, Portugal;
2Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental - Internal Medicine, Lisbon, Portugal.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Hyperglycemia (irrespective of the presence of diabetes) has been associated with
worse outcomes in hospitalized patients with a variety of diseases, namely critical
illness. It is been recently proposed that a relative hyperglycemia
- Stress
Hyperglycemia Ratio (SHR) - might be even better associated with disease
outcomes. We studied how SHR correlated with various morbidity parameters in
hospitalized patients due to acute pyelonephritis.
Methods
We conducted a retrospective study in a Portuguese hospital. We included every
patient admitted to Medicine or Endocrinology wards with the main diagnosis of
acute pyelonephritis (which had HbA1c measured during the stay) between 2012
and 2015. SHR was calculated as admission glycemia divided by estimated
average glucose derived from HbA1c. We assessed the duration of the hospital
stay, analytical markers and Systemic Inflamatory Response Syndrome (SIRS)
criteria at admission.
Results
A total of 57 patients (71.9% female) were included, with a mean age of 76.7
years old. 77.2% had the diagnosis of Type 2 Diabetes and the remainder were
non-diabetic. 45.6% had sepsis criteria and the mean duration of hospital stay was
12.4 days. SHR (but not absolute glycemia) correlated positively with the length
of hospital stay (PZ0.041) and negatively with estimated glomerular filtrate rate
(CKD-EPI formula) (PZ0.018) at admission, in a Pearson correlation test. After
adjusting for age, sex and diabetes presence, SHR correlated positively with the
number of SIRS criteria.
Conclusion
SHR,  which  takes  into  account  background  glycemia  rather  than  absolute
glycemia alone, might be a biomarker of disease severity in case of patients
hospitalized with acute pyelonephritis irrespective of being diabetic or not. Given
this was a retrospective study and sample size was rather small, further studies are
needed to confirm this hypothesis and to assess SHR relation with clinical
outcomes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP449
EP450
Reactive hypoglycemia: effectiveness of dietary regimen in a Tunisian
population
Maria Khatib, Hajer Kandara, Wafa Grira, H Chikhrouhou, Laila BenSalem
& Cloud BenSlama
INNT, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Reactive hypoglycemia (RH) is characterized by postprandial hypoglycemic
disorder aggravated by the ingestion of high glycaemic index (GI) foods.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of dietary regimen
recommended for patients with RH.
Methods
This  interventional  prospective  study  included
20
patients  consulted  with
symptoms suggesting RH, duration of monitoring was one month. Data had
been collected by a spontaneous dietary survey and a questionnaire containing
four items (demographic conditions, eating habits and lifestyle; evaluation of the
effectiveness of the regimen). The questionnaire data had been collected before
and after the diet regimen. Data entry was made by the Excel and analyzed by
SPSS statistical software 16 and 19 and the food BILNUT investigation software.
Results
The mean age of the patients was 45.4G14 years. Daily caloric intake has been
decreased from mean 2910.6 to 2717.1 Kcal/day and even carbohydrate intake of
396.3
(G213.7) to 314.5 (G102.3) g/day.
Daily intakes of respective proportions before and after the diet as shown below:
for the protein was 90 (G35.8) and 90.4 (G21.8) g/day for the fibbers was 20.8
and 30 g/day for lipids was 107.3 (G46.2) and 122 (G25.1) g/day. There was
significant reduction in frequency and severity of hypoglycemia (PZ0.021).
Discussion and conclusion
The recommended regimen was effective in reducing episodes and severity of
RH. We need other long-term prospective studies to better explain factors
involved in this effectiveness.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP450
EP451
Gut microbiota and diet in patients with various glucose tolerance
Lilit Egshatyan1,3, Daria Kashtanova1, Anna Popenko2, Olga Tkacheva1,
Alexander Tyakht2, Dmitry Alexeev2, Natalia Karamnova1 &
Sergey Boytsov1
1FSI ‘National Research Center for Preventive Medicine’ of the Ministry
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia;2Institute for
Physical-Chemical Medicine, Moscow, Russia;3Moscow State University
of Medicine and Dentistry named after A.I. Evdokimov, Moscow, Russia.
Background
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a progressive disease. The gut microbiota has recently
been identified as a new potential diabetes risk factor.
Design
To investigate the gut microbiota composition in association with the dietary
patterns in patients with different glucose tolerance we analyzed 92 patients: with
normal  glucose  tolerance
(nZ48),  prediabetes
(nZ24)  and  T2D  (nZ20).
Metagenomic analysis was performed using 16SrRNA sequencing. The diet has
been studied by a frequency method with a quantitative evaluation of food intake
using a computer program.
Results
Patients with different glucose tolerance did not differ among themselves in the
amount of consumed proteins, fats, carbohydrates. Patients with various glucose
metabolism disorders differed among themselves the level of fasting glucose and
HbA1c (higher in T2D), as well as the energy value of the daily diet and the
amount of consumed carbohydrates (less in T2D). Microbiota in the samples was
predominantly represented by Firmicutes and in a less degree by Bacteroidetes.
Blautia was a dominanting genus in all samples. The representation of Blautia,
Serratia was lower in prediabetes than in T2D patients, and even lower in those
with normal glucose tolerance. After the clustering of the samples into groups
according  to  the  percentage  of  protein,  fat,  carbohydrates  in  the  diet,  the
representation of the Bacteroides turned to be lower and Prevotella abundance
turned to be higher in carbohydrate cluster. There were more patients with T2D
(PZ0.002) in the  fat-protein cluster. Using  the  Calinski-Harabasz  index
identified the samples with more similar diets. It was discovered that half of
the patients with a high-fat diet had normal tolerance, the others had T2D. The
regression  analysis  showed  that  these  T2D  patients  also  had  a  higher
representation of Blautia (PZ0.0001).
Conclusions
The  high  Blautia  representation  in  combination  with  high-fat  diet
(138G
63 g/day) is correlated with T2D.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP451
EP452
Circulating adipokine levels and insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes
mellitus and metabolic syndrome
Sitwat Zehra1, Mozaffer Rahim Hingorjo2, Erum Imran2 &
Masood Anwar Qureshi2
1The Karachi Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, KIBGE,
Karachi, Pakistan;2Jinnah Medical and Dental College, Karachi, Pakistan;
3Dow International Medical College, Dow University of Health Sciences,
Karachi, Pakistan.
Objectives
The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is increasing rapidly with
obesity being a major risk factor. Adipocytes, besides storing fat, release a
number of adipokines. Our study explored the association of leptin and resistin
released by adipocytes in the pathogenesis of T2DM in context of metabolic
syndrome.
Methods
This was a cross sectional study in which we measured plasma levels of insulin,
leptin and resistin in 50 healthy non-diabetic controls and 114 subjects with
T2DM. Diagnostic variables for metabolic syndrome were measured, including:
blood pressure, adiposity indices, lipid profile and fasting glucose. Homeostasis
model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) was used to measure insulin
resistance with 75th percentile value taken as cutoff point.
Results
Leptin strongly correlated with adiposity indices especially abdominal volume
index, P!0.001. Resistin, however, did not show such correlation. In both
genders, there was significant difference in the levels of insulin, HOMA-IR and
resistin between control group and T2DM (P!0.01) and between controls and
T2DM with metabolic syndrome (P!0.001). This relationship was not seen with
leptin. Insulin resistance in males and females, as according to HOMA-IR level,
was R3.7 and R3.8, respectively, and was significantly greater (P!0.01) in
diabetics.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Leptin levels strongly correlate with and may be used as a potential marker of
obesity. Resistin does not directly correlate with insulin resistance and metabolic
syndrome. However, its significant rise in T2DM and metabolic syndrome groups
as compared to controls cannot be ignored and require further studies.
Keywords: metabolic syndrome, adipokines, HOMA-IR, type 2 diabetes mellitus,
Insulin resistance
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP452
EP453
Frequency of diabetes and thyroid autoantibodies in patients with type
1 diabetes and their siblings
Chan Jong Kim, Ka Young Oh, Yun Hee Kim & Eun Mi Yang
Department of Pediatrics, Chonnam National University Medical School
and Hospital, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
Background
We investigated the frequency of autoimmune thyroid and diabetes antibodies in
patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), their siblings, and controls.
Methods
Glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies (GADA), islet cell antibodies (ICA),
insulin  autoantibodies
(IAA),  and  thyroid  antibodies  were  identified  in  all
subjects.
Results
The rates of positive GADA and IAA were significantly higher in probands
compared to siblings (P!0.001) and controls (P!0.001). None of the pancreatic
autoantibodies were different between siblings and healthy controls. Thyroid
antiperoxidase antibody (TPOAb) and antithyroglobulin antibody (TGAb) were
significantly different between probands and control subjects (PZ0.002 and
PZ0.018, retrospectively). The positive rates of TPOAb and TGAb in siblings
were higher than those of controls, but no differences were detected between the
groups. Thyroid autoimmunity (TA) was significantly different among the groups
(PZ0.004). Siblings of TA-positive probands revealed a greater prevalence of
thyroid autoantibodies than did the control subjects (PZ0.022), whereas siblings
of TA-negative probands did not show such an increase over controls.
Conclusion
The prevalence of pancreatic and thyroid antibody positivity in probands was
statistically significant compared to siblings and controls. Siblings of TA-positive
probands revealed a greater prevalence of thyroid autoantibodies than did the
control subjects. So the screening for TA in siblings, particularly siblings of
TA-positive probands, is as important as in probands.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP453
EP454
PAI-1 polymorphism in patients with diabetes
Volha Shyshko1, Tatjana Mokhort1, Alexander Gonchar3,
Elena Konstantinova2 & Natalia Tsapaeva1
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;2Institute of Heat and
Mass Transfer, the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus, Minsk,
Belarus;3Institute of Genetics and Cytology, the National Academy of
Sciences of Belarus, Minsk, Belarus.
Background
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) refers to group of is a serine protein
inhibitors. It inhibits fibrinolysis and contributes to angiogenesis and atherogen-
esis processes. 4G/5G polymorphism was found to be associated with increased
risk  for  cardiovascular  diseases.  It  was  of  special  interest  to  study  PAI-1
polymorphism in patients with diabetes.
Aim
Aim to study PAI-1 polymorphism in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and
concomitant coronary heart disease (CHD).
Materials and methods
48 patients were included: group 1-20 almost healthy person, group 2-13 patients
with T2D, group 3-15 patients with T2D and CHD. Patients were under 60 years
old, patients with T2D were compensated by HbA1c (6.5C1.2% in group 2 and
6.5C0.6% in group three correspondingly). Polymorphic variant of PAI-1 was
determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Results and discussion
4G/5G polymorphism was statistically significant more frequent in patients with
T2D and concomitant CHD (ten of the 15, 66,7%) compared to patients with
diabetes (three of the 13, 23.1%) (P!0.05) and almost healthy person (ten of the
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
20, 50%) (P!0.05). In group 2 4G/4G polymorphism was recorded in five
patients (38.5%) that was more frequent compared to group 3 (two of 15, 13.3%)
(P!0.05), and six of 20 in controls (30%). There was no difference in frequencies
between groups in 5G/5G polymorphism (three patients (15%) in group 1, four
patients (30.8%) in group 2 and three patients (20%) in group 4).
Conclusion
4G/5G polymorphism is associated with CHD in patients with type 2 diabetes.
4G/4G  polymorphism  is  supposed  to  have  protective  role  in  relation  to
macrovascular complication in diabetic patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP454
EP455
Metabolic syndrome as independent risk factor of poor glycemic control
in type 2 diabetic patients
Richard G Buendia1,2, Sonia Velandia1,2, Catalina Tobón2,
Adelaida Espinosa2, Alejandra Contreras1, Margarita Sanchez2, Oscar Paz2,
Eleonora Viscaino2, Amanda Paez2 & Alejandra Morales1
1Colsubsidio Centro Médico de especialistas, Bogotá, Colombia;2Hospital
Central de la Policia, Bogotá, Colombia.
Type 2 diabetes is considered a disease of epidemic proportions, its control is
important to prevent macro and microvascular complications.
This study aims to determine the factors associated with poor glycemic control,
defined as HbA1c O7% in type 2 diabetic patients of cardiovascular risk program
of the Central Hospital of National Police in Colombia
Methodology
This is a descriptive cross-sectional study, where it is performed univariate and
multivariate analysis of factors associated with poor glycemic control in the type 2
diabetes patients.
Results
3417 patients of cardiovascular risk program of which 1058 are type 2 diabetic
patients were included. As independent factors of poor glycemic control found an
LDL cholesterol O100 mgdl ORZ1.47 (95% CI 1.12-1.944, PZ0.006); HDL
! 40 mg/dl in men and !50 mg/dl in women ORZ1.44 (95% CI 1.043-1.99,
PZ0.027); Duration of diabetes ORZ1.066 (95% CI 1.049-1.084, PZ0.001);
Microalbuminuria  O30 mg/g  creatinuria  ORZ1.484
(95%  CI  1.11-1.978,
PZ0.007) and IDF criteria of metabolic syndrome ORZ2.30 (95%CI 1.47-
3.59, PZ0.001); adjusting for age, smoking, BMI and triglycerides.
Conclusion
The metabolic syndrome is an independent factor of poor glycemic control in type
2 diabetic patients; highlighting the importance of therapeutic lifestyle changes;
they  have  been  included  in the  programs  of  prevention  and  control of
cardiovascular risk patients, in order to reduce the presence of the constituent
factors of metabolic Syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP455
EP456
Serum vitamin D levels in patients with gestational diabetes mellitus
Arif Zengin1, Suleyman Ahbab1, Esra Ataoglu1, Betul Cavusoglu Turker1 &
Evrim Cakir2
1Haseki Training and Research Hospital, Internal Medicine Clinic, Istanbul,
Turkey;2Haseki Training and Research Hospital, Endocrinology and
Metabolic Diseases, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background
Insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus are associated with decreased serum
vitamin D level. Therefore, we evaluate the 25-OH-vitamin D in GDM. This
study was performed to evaluate the serum vitamin D levels in GDM patients.
Methods
This study consisted of 38 patients with GDM who followed up in Haseki
Training and Research Hospital’s Endocrinology outpatient clinic. GDM was
diagnosed with 50 g (if postprandial 1 h O130-199 mg/dl) and then 100 g oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT) in 24-28 gestational weeks. The cut off criteria for
GDM were as following at least two of results as; fasting blood glucose: 95 mg/dl,
postprandial 1 h: 180 mg/dl, 2 h: 155 mg/dl, 3 h: 140 mg/dl. Serum vitamin D
level and biochemical parameters were analyzed. Patients were divided into two
groups as Group A (vitamin D !20 ng/ml) and Group B (O20 ng/ml).
Results
Mean BMI was 28.37G4.02 in Group A, 25.62G5.60 in Group B, (P: 0.033).
Mean peripartum HbA1c was 5.51G0.54% in Group A and 5.04G0.48% in
Group B, (P: 0.006). There was no any statistical difference in other biochemical
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
parameters.  Vitamin  D  was  found  to  be  negatively  correlated  with  BMI
(r: K0.377, P: 0.03) and peripartum HbA1c (r: K0.424, P: 0.014).
Conclusion
Vitamin D has a close relationship with BMI and peripartum HbA1c value.
Moreover, decreased serum vitamin D level was correlates with higher BMI and
HbA1c. Serum vitamin D level should be analyzed and followed up in patients
during pregnancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP456
EP457
Acute pancreatitis and diabetic ketoacidosis in non-diabetic psychotic
patient
Ibtissem Oueslati, Karima Khiari, Emna Elfeleh, Nadia Mchirgui,
Najla Bchir & Néjib Ben Abdallah
Department of Endocrinology-Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Simultaneous  occurrence  of  acute  pancreatitis  and  diabetic  ketoacidosis
represents a very rare complication of antipsychotic medications.
Herein we report the case of acute pancreatitis and diabetic ketoacidosis in a non-
diabetic  patient  while  on  treatment  with  haloperidol,  chlorpromazine  and
carbamazepine
Case report
Mr. Z A is a 50-year-old non-diabetic man who was diagnosed with psychotic
disorder and treated with haloperidol, chlorpromazine and carbamazepine. There
were no past or present history of alcohol use and no history of gallstones or
trauma.
In September 2015, the patient presented with sudden onset weakness and
vomiting. On examination, he had a body weight of 110 kg, a BMI of 40.4 kg/m2
and  he  was tachycardic  and tachypnoeic. Abdominal examination  revealed
tenderness in the epigastrium. Capillary glycemia was 3.56 g/l with glycosur-
iaZCCC and acetonuriaZCCC. On laboratory tests, he had a glycemia of
24 mmol/l, a bicarbonate level !3 mmol/l and an acute inflammation. Lipase was
elevated at 1024 U/l (nrZ7-60). Calcemia, lipid and liver function tests were
normal.
Abdominal CT-scan showed acute pancreatitis features.
Patient was managed with insulin and intravenous fluids with a good recovery.
Conclusion
In our patient, features supporting acute pancreatitis secondary to antipsychotic
drugs include the absence of alcohol intake, trauma or gallstones and normal
lipids and calcemia. The possibility of developing acute pancreatitis and diabetic
ketoacidosis while treated with antipsychotic agents impose periodic metabolic
screening.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP457
EP458
Identification of LADA in normal weight diabetic Albanian population
Gerond Husi1, Ersida Golemi5, Dorina Ylli5, Matilda Kelmendi2,
Thanas Furreraj1, Violeta Hoxha1, Elizana Petrela4, Zamira Ylli3 &
Emirvina Kolici5
1
Endocrinology Service UHC: Other Teresa, Tirana, Albania;2Policlinic of
Specialities Nr.2, Tirana, Albania;3Imunology Service UHC Mother
Teresa, Tirana, Albania;4Statistic Department, Tirana, Albania;5Neostyle
Clinic, Tirana, Albania.
Background
Latent  autoimmune  diabetes  of  adults
(LADA)  constitutes
5-10%  of  the
population with diabetes. Early diagnosis of LADA prevents misdiagnostification
of  type
2 diabetes  and  helps  in  the  optimal  treatment  of  patients,  while
maintaining a residual B cell function and delaying the time of their destruction.
Aim
The aim of the study identifying groups with higher risk of LADA in an Albanian
population.
Material and methods
We recruited 149 neo-diagnosed diabetic patients aged from 30 to 60 years old.
Age, sex, BMI, Waist circumference (WC), family history (FH), C-peptide,
insulinaemia  and  anti-GAD  antibodies  were  measured.  Based  on  BMI  the
population was divided in three groups: (N) normal weight BMI !25 kg/m2, (Ov)
overweight (BMI 25-30 kg/m2) and (Ob) obese BMI O30 kg/m2. According to
family history the population was divided in positive FH and negative FH. LADA
prevalence was calculated in all the groups.
Results
The overall LADA prevalence was 18.7%. The Prevalence of LADA in the N
group was 33.3%, in the Ov group 30.9% and in the Ob group 9.5%. LADA’s
prevalence in the positive FH group was 17.2% and in the negative FH group
34.7%. In the non obese group (NCOv) with negative FH LADA’s prevalence
reached 35.9% and increases even more in the N with negative FH the reaching
46.2%.
Conclusion
The overall LADA prevalence was 18.7%. According to our data subjects with
normal weigh and no family history of diabetes have a higher risk of LADA, this
emphasis the importance to investigate the autoimmune pattern in order to have
earlier diagnosis and optimal treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP458
EP459
The risk of developing of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in type 2
diabetes mellitus patients in Uzbek population
S I Ismailov1,2, D M Esimova2, S U Muminova1, F T Sultanova2 &
Kh R Gulyamova1
1Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan;2RSSPMC of
Endocrinology, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Actuality
According to WHO, 36% of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) suffer
from obstructive sleep apnoe syndrome (OSAS), which is one of global problems
of modern medicine. International classification of sleep disorders identified that
24% of men and 9% of women with T2DM observe symptoms of OSAS. Sleep
apnea has a negative effect on the function of the beta cells of the pancreas and
insulin sensitivity. Obstructive sleep apnea has a negative impact on the quality of
life of patients with type 2 diabetes in the physical and psychological sphere,
lowers the overall health and performance of physiological sleep.
Purpose
Study the risk of OSAS in T2DM patients in Uzbekistan.
Materials and methods
The study included 300 patients, 150 women and 150 men with T2DM in middle
age (45-60 years). Disease duration from 5 to 15 years. Identification of OSAS
was carried out  by STOP-BANG questionnaire with measurement of neck
circumference, body mass index. OSAS risk was determined by summing up the
points(p): high risk 5-8p, average 3-4p, low 0-2p.
Results
46
(31%) women and 46 (31%) of men had high risk, 78 (52%) women and 69
(46%) men had medium risk, 26 (17%) women and 35 (23%) men had low risk of
OSAS. OSAS prevailed in the group of middle-aged women with low quality of
life in comparison with men.
Conclusion
Our data results showed no gender differences in the high risk of sleep apnea
development among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus in Uzbekistan. While
middle risk groups included more women 78 (52%). Low risk group consisted of
35
(23%) men predominantly. Our results contradict international data and show
that women are more prone to OSAS than men.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP459
EP460
Importance of determination of albuminuria in patients with newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus
Lev Prystupiuk, Liudmyla Naumova, Maksym Prystupiuk,
Marianna Naumova & Oleksandr Prystupiuk
Bogomolets National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Introduction
Worldwide, patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) compose 90-95% of
total number of diabetics. 10% of people aged under 60 years are affected with
T2DM, also are 10-20% of people aged 60-69 years, and 15-20% over the age of
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
70 years. The risk of diabetes may reach 30-40% during lifetime due to other
factors than age. T2DM is characterised by higher development of cardiovascular
lesions, which even more worsens the condition of the patient and increases the
burden on the health care system. And since albuminuria is considered as a risk
factor for cardiovascular complications and mortality, its determination is very
important in screening programs for diabetes even after adjustment of other risk
factors.
The aim of the study
To determine the level of albuminuria in patients with actively diagnosed T2DM.
Materials and methods
The screening for albuminuria involved 200 people aged 45-65 years, 100 males
and 100 females, who during the screening for T2DM, were found to have HbA1c
level over 6.5%. Albuminuria was determined by quantitative and qualitative
methods. Detection sensitivity test regarding protein is 10-15 mg/l. All patients
also were measured, in sitting, state for blood pressure on the shoulder by a
mercury manometer.
Results
Albuminuria was found in 20% of males and 30% of females of the study.
Subjects with BP up to 160/90 mmHg were found to have albuminuria in 32%,
and with BP over 160/90 mmHg - 68%. Albuminuria was found in 13% of
examined patients with HbA1c level 6.5-7.0%, and in 27% of patients with
HbA1c level over 7.1%.
Conclusions
i) Albuminuria was found in 20% of males and 30% of females with newly
diagnosed T2DM.
ii) The number of patients with albuminuria increased with HbA1c level over
7.1%.
iii)  Albuminuria  was  diagnosed  among  all  patients  with  both  T2DM  and
hypertension.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP460
EP461
Procrastination and glycemic control of gestational diabetes -
preliminary report
Ioannis Ilias1, Charalambos Milionis1, Anastasia Linardi1,
Eftychia Koukkou1, Athanasios Tselebis2 & Stamatina Nikopoulou1
1Department of Endocrinology, El. Venizelou Hospital, Athens, Greece;
2Department of Psychiatry, Sotiria Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Psychological  dimensions  of  gestational  diabetes  mellitus
(GDM)  are  not
adequately studied and related research is limited. Procrastination as a personality
trait is involved in many aspects of daily life; it has not been studied in relation
to GDM.
Aim
To assess procrastination in insulin-treated women with GDM.
Patients-methods
A total of 15 women (mean age CS.D.: 33C4 years) diagnosed with GDM
between 24-28 weeks of gestation (with a 75 g OGTT and the HAPO study
criteria) and treated with O1 insulin injection/day. Over the last 4-5 weeks of
pregnancy the women replied to Lay’s questionnaire (General Procrastination
Scale; validated Greek version), consisting of 20 questions, with five answers
each
(from
‘never’  to
‘always’).  The  minimum  possible  score  on  the
questionnaire is 20 and the maximum score is 100. Glycemic control of GDM
was assessed by SMBG diaries covering a 1-3 week period. Glycemia was
regarded as satisfactory with fasting glucose values !92 mg/dl and postprandial
values !130 mg/dl (C1 hour) or !120 mg/dl (C2 hours). Glycemic control
was considered as being satisfactory when 75% of measurements were within
targets. Data were analyzed by plotting a ROC plot.
Results
Less than half of the women (nZ7) had satisfactory glycemic control. Women
with low procrastination score (!50) had worse glycemic control compared to
those with high procrastination score (O50) (area under the ROC curve Z0.82).
Discussion
The diagnosis of GDM creates tension and anxiety in pregnancy - especially in
women treated with insulin - leading to increased obsessive-compulsiveness and
stress. Procrastination is a self-defeating behavior, characterized by short-term
benefits but long-term problems. This study shows that procrastination can,
however, play a favorable role in the glycemic control of GDM.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP461
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP462
Factors associated with increased irisin levels in type 1 diabetes mellitus
Ihsan Ates1, Mustafa Kaplan2, Duygu Mese1, Kubra Erdogan1,
Mahmut Yuksel2, Canan Topcuoglu3, Nisbet Yilmaz1 & Serdar Guler4,5
1Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara Numune Training and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Gastroenterology, Turkey
Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;
3Department of Biochemistry, Ankara Numune Training and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;4Department of Biochemistry, Ankara Numune
Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;5Hitit University School,
C¸ orum, Turkey.
Aims
We aimed to determine the irisin level in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus
(T1DM) and to examine the relation of irisin level with inflammation and
autoimmunity.
Methods
This study included 35 cases diagnosed with T1DM and 36 healthy volunteers.
Anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (Anti-GAD), islet cell antibody (ICA), insulin
autoantibody levels of the patients have been measured at the time they were
included in the study and were recorded from the patient files. Serum irisin levels
were measured by ELISA kit.
Results
The median irisin level was determined higher in T1DM group compared to the
control group (6.8 ng/ml vs 4.8 ng/ml, PZ0.022; respectively). Median irisin
level was found higher in anti-GAD (PZ0.022) and ICA (PZ0.044) positive
groups compared to negative groups. In T1DM group irisin level displayed a
positive  correlation  with  glycosylated  hemoglobin
(HbA1c)
(rZ0.377,
P!0.001) and anti-GAD (rZ0.392, PZ0.020) and a negative correlation with
creatinine (rZK0390, PZ0.021). In multivariate regression model, HbA1c (BG
SE: 2.76G17 683, P! 0.001), and anti-GAD (BG SE: 2.311G0.610, PZ0.001)
were determined as independent predictors for predicting the irisin level.
Conclusion
In patients of T1DM, which chronic inflammation and autoimmunity take part in
its etiopathogenesis, anti-GAD level was an independent risk factor for irisin.
This suggests that factors such as inflammation and autoimmunity can be effective
in the synthesis of irisin.
Keywords:  anti-glutamic  acid  decarboxylase,  fibronectin  type  III  domain
containing 5, HbA1c, hyperglycemia, PGC1-a
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP462
EP463
Interleukin-6, interleukin-15 concentrations and insulin resistance in
autoimmune diabetes
Katarzyna Siewko, Anna Zielinska, Rafal Maciulewski,
Anna Poplawska-Kita, Beata Telejko, Danuta Lipinska, Maria Gorska &
Malgorzata Szelachowska
Department of Endocrinology, Medical University, Diabetology and
Internal Medicine, Bialystok, Poland.
Background
Interleukin-15 and -6 play a role in an inflammation, autoimmune, infectious and
cancerous processes. Their increased concentrations were observed in psoriasis,
asthma, multiple sclerosis and type 2 diabetes. However, the role of IL-15 and
IL-6 in autoimmune diabetes (AD) pathogenesis is still unknown.
Aim
The aim of our study was to assay circulating IL-15 and IL-6 levels in newly
diagnosed AD patients, their I8 relatives and healthy controls in comparison to the
presence of anti-islet antibodies and insulin resistance.
Material and methods
The group studied consisted of 54 patients with AD (28 with LADA and 26 with
T1D), 70 I8 relatives and 60 controls. IL-6, IL-15 and anti-islet antibodies
concentrations were measured by ELISA method. HOMAIR and eGDR were
calculated.
Results
The patients with AD had significantly higher IL-15, IL-6 and HOMAIR and
lower  eGDR  than  the  controls
(P!0.001)  and  I8
relatives
(P!0.001).
Significantly higher IL-15 and IL-6 were shown in the relatives with positive
Ab as compared to the relatives without antibodies (P!0.001) and the controls
(P!0.001). IL-15 negatively correlated with eGDR (rZK0.436, PZ0.02) in
LADA and positively with HOMAIR in LADA and T1D (rZ0.5072, P!0.001;
rZ0.4209, P!0.001).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Conclusions
Significantly higher IL-15, IL-6 concentrations, HOMAIR and markedly lower
eGDR in newly diagnosed AD patients and I8 relatives with positive anti-islet
antibodies might suggest the role of these proinflammatory cytokines and insulin
resistance in the pathogenesis of AD. IL-15 and IL-6 might be used as biomarkers
of the risk of AD development, in particular IL-15 for LADA. Both type of
method of IR measurement seem to be equally useful for calculate insulin
resistance in AD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP463
EP464
The importance of gender difference in evaluation of relationship
between MPV and serum biochemical parameters in type 2 diabetic
patients
Yildiz Okuturlar1, Hakan Kocoglu1, Omer Seker1, Betul Erismis1,
Bahar Ozdemir1, Meral Mert2, Sibel Ocak Serin3, Mehmet Hursitoglu1,
Ozlem Harmankaya1 & Abdulbaki Kumbasar1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Education and
Research Hospital, istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology,
Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey;3Umraniye Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Increased  mean  platelet  volume
(MPV)  is  an  independent  risk  factor  for
thromboembolism, stroke and myocardial infarction. In this study we tried to
emphasize the importance of gender difference in evaluation of relationship
between MPV and serum biochemical parameters in type 2 diabetic patients.
Methods
A total of 509 patients with diabetes mellitus who hospitalized due to several
causes were retrospectively evaluated. Age, gender, other comorbidities, HbA1c,
and other biochemical parameters were recorded. All data were analyzed by using
SPSS 22.0 statistical package for Windows.
Result
A total of 509 patients consisted of 269 women and 240 men were included in this
study. There was no difference in regard to other comorbidities between genders
(PO0.05). Mean ages of women and men were 65.43G16.1 and 64.84G14.98
years, respectively (PZ0.669). The mean MPV values of women and men were
8.61G1.40 and 8.52G1.47 fL, respectively (PZ0.486). Erythrocyte sedimen-
tation rate (ESR) (PZ0.016), HDL-cholesterol (Chol) (PZ0.024), total-Chol
(PZ0.01), and platelet (PLT) (PZ0.035) levels were significantly higher in
women  whereas  urea
(PZ0.08),  creatinine
(PZ0.0001),  and  triglyceride
(PZ0.002)  levels  were  significantly  higher  in  men.  There  were  positive
correlations between MPV and urea, creatinine, uric acid, and PDW values and
there were negative correlations between MPV and total-chol, LDL-chol, and
PLT in women. Also there were positive correlations between MPV and HbA1c,
glucose, uric acid, and PDW values and there were negative correlations between
MPV and ESR and PLT values in men.
Conclusion
We did not find any difference in MPV values between male and female patients
with diabetes. But we have showed that the significance of correlation analysis
between MPV and each biochemical parameter depended upon gender. Thus the
importance of gender difference in studies evaluating MPV levels in diabetic
patients should be considered.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP464
EP465
Descriptive observational study of a group of diabetic patients admitted
to Hospital Punta De Europa from Gibraltar area health field during
the year 2015
Carmen Bautista Recio, Mariana Tomé Fernández-Ladreda &
Daniel González Duarte
Andalusian Health Care, Hospital Punta De Europa, Cadiz, Spain.
Objectives
The prevalence of diabetic patients admitted in hospitals close to 20% in some
series. Our goal is to determine the prevalence of diabetic patients assessed by
interclinical calls from different medical and surgical specialties that have been
entered during 2015 in our Hospital, in order to describe the characteristics that
these diabetic patients.
Material and methods
We present 116 patients evaluated by interclinical consultation request form from
different medical and surgical specialties. The patients were admitted in Algeciras
Hospital (Gibraltar Health Area) during 12 months - period beginning from 1
January to 31 December 2015. We have determined the different quantitative and
qualitative variables: source of income, sex, age, type of diabetes, time of
evolution, place of origin, family history, hospital stay, treatment before and
during admission, complications of their diabetes and other cardiovascular risk
factors associated.
Summary of results
58.3% were women compared to 41.7% of men with diabetes. The type 2 diabetes
was 83.3%, 12.5% with type 1 diabetes, and 4.2% Diabetes not known before
admission. The mean age of patients admitted with type 2 diabetes was 59.3C/K
19.14 ST, and average age of type 1 patients was 34.6 years. Mean hospital stay
was 23.5C/K 19.7 days, and a 31.7% of readmissions. The survival rate was
87.5% versus 12.5% EXITUS.
Conclusions
† The Endocrinology Unit of Punta Europa Hospital (Gibraltar Health Area)
received an average of 9.7 interclinical calls per month in 2015, in order to
assessment of hyperglycemia in diabetic patients, either secondary to diabetes
known as metabolically decompensated or in patients with no known diabetes
before to admission.
† Hyperglycemia is a common finding in hospitalized patients. It is associated
with increased days of hospital stay, morbidity and mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP465
EP466
Influence of hypercalcemia and elevated parathyroid hormone level in
the development of type 2 diabetes
Elena Brutskaya-Stempkovskaya1,2 & Alla Shepelkevich1
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;2Minsk City
Polyclinic N31, Minsk, Belarus.
Status of carbohydrate metabolism in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism
(PGPT) has been studied extensively in recent years, but the results of studies on
the  impact  of  long-term  elevated  levels  of  parathyroid  hormone  and
hypercalcemia on the risk of type 2 diabetes continues to be in the discussion.
Objective
To study is to examine the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in patients with
manifested and asymptomatic PGPT.
Materials and methods
General clinical examination of 136 patients with PGPT (note the presence of
type 2 diabetes, available at diagnosis PGPT and developed in the period from
diagnosis  to  surgical  treatment  PGPT),  investigated  parathyroid  hormone,
vitamin D and calcium.
Results
The asymptomatic PGPT reported in 54 patients (a mean age was 51.5G11.6
years), manifested PGPT - 82 patients (a mean age was 52G10.4 years). Type 2
diabetes is detected in 2 (3.7%) patients with asymptomatic PGPT and 12 persons
(14.3%) with the manifested PGPT.
Significant differences was detected in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in both
groups of patients with PGPT (FZ0.81, P!0.05).
Conclusion
The results of the study show an increasing prevalence of type 2 diabetes in
patients with manifested PGPT compared with asymptomatic PGPT. The results
may indicate the influence of long-term hypercalcemia and elevated levels of
parathyroid hormone in the frequency of manifestation of type 2 diabetes in
patients with PGPT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP466
EP467
Hypertension in type 2 diabetes mellitus: associated treatment and
degree of control
Jose Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1 & Carmen Maria Cortes-Salazar2
1Endocrinology Department, Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital,
Malaga, Spain;2Badolatosa Primary Care Centre, Seville, Spain.
Objectives
To evaluate the prevalence of hypertension in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus
(T2DM)  and  to  analyze  the  clinical  characteristics,  the  degree  of
achieved control and the associated antihypertensive treatment.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
Cross-sectional study which included patients with T2DM followed in a primary
care setting. Data about age, sex, associated antihypertensive treatment, systolic
blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) was collected.
Results
From 79 patients included, 78.5% had hypertension. Mean age was 72.5 years
(standard deviation [S.D.] 10.1 years) and 62.9% were men. Mean SBP was
126.5 mmHg (S.D. 13.7) and mean DBP 72.9 mmHg (S.D. 8.6). 77.6% of patients
achieved  blood  pressure  levels
!140/90 mmHg.  All  patients  were  on
antihypertensive treatment:
35.5% with ACE inhibitors, 45.2% with ARBs,
61.3% with diuretics and 30.6% with calcium channel blockers. Average number
of antihypertensives was 2.15 (29% monotherapy, dual therapy 30.6%, triple
therapy 32.3%, four or more antihypertensives 8.1%).
Conclusions
The vast majority of patients with T2DM have high blood pressure, but it is
usually well-controlled. At least two antihypertensive drugs were used is most
patients to control blood pressure, being the most used drug class ARBs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP467
EP468
Earlier development of diabetes mellitus type 2 as a consequence to
psychological and physiological stress
Samrah Shaheen1, Maleeha Akram1, Sarwat Jahan2, Ghazala Kokab Raja3,
Syed Ali Raza Kazmi4, Abida Raza5, Afzaal Ahmed Naseem1,
Mazhar Qayyum1 & Syed Shakeel Raza Rizvi1
1
Department of Zoology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University
Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan;2Department of Animal Sciences,
Quaid-e-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan;3University Institute of
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture
University Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan;4Aga Khan Health Centre,
Rawalpindi, Pakistan;5Nuclear Medicine Oncology and Radiotherapy
Institute (NORI), Islamabad, Pakistan.
Diabetes mellitus type 2 (DM-2) is a disorder characterized by high blood glucose
levels in the context of insulin resistance and relative insulin deficiency. DM-2 is
typically an outcome of combinations of hereditary elements of impaired insulin
release and insulin resistance, and natural variables like obesity, overeating,
absence of activity, aging and stress. A number of hormones, such as cortisol and
growth
(GH),  have  insulin-antagonistic  effects.  Cortisol  is  a  predominant
biological marker of stress, whereas GH is released in response to stress. This
study explored stress as a predisposing factor in causing DM-2 by determining
psychological stress using depression, anxiety and stress scale, physiological
stress by measuring plasma cortisol and GH through ECLIA and random blood
sugar (RBS) levels by glucometer in 100 male and female DM-2 patients of 21-60
years and 100 age-matched controls. The level of psychological stress was
moderate to severe in all age groups with significantly higher level in age groups
of 21-30 and 31-40 years. The higher level of psychological stress corresponded
well with higher level of physiological stress in terms of release of cortisol in
patients of 21-30 and 31-40 years, although cortisol concentrations were higher
in all groups compared to normal subjects. The higher level of psychological
stress did not influence physiological stress much in terms of GH release,
although  GH  concentrations  were  markedly  but  non-significantly  higher  in
diabetic patients compared to control groups. The concentrations of cortisol and
glucose were positively correlated in all age groups. The majority of patients was
married, belonged to lower middle class, fell in normal BMI category, had
diabetic mothers and exhibited higher RBS whether or not they exercised,
followed diet plan or used oral medication. In conclusion, stress is one of the
dominant factors resulting in development of type 2 diabetes mellitus in our local
population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP468
EP469
The differences in insulin doses and the risk of hypoglycemia in 2
distinct days in the Romania diabetes futsal team
Daniel-Tudor Cosma1, Alina Cristina Silaghi2, Horatiu Silaghi3 &
Ioan Andrei Veresiu1
1Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases Clinical Center, Cluj-Napoca,
Cluj County, Romania;2Endocrinology Clinic, Emergency Clinical County
Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Cluj County, Romania;3The Vth Department of
Surgery, ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
In type 1 diabetes athletes, the proper adjustments of insulin doses and carbs
intake are essential in order to avoid a hypoglycemic event that could affect the
sport performances.
The aim of the study was to assess the risk of hypoglycemia, the insulin and
glycemic variability in 2 different days (with and without physical activity) in a
group of nine players with type 1 diabetes, members of the Romania diabetes
futsal team (twice European champion).
The evaluation was achieved by means of a self monitoring journal in which the
players were asked to note at least 7 glycemic values (at least one during the night,
at 0300 h) in 2 different days. The relative risk (RR) and the odds ratio (OR) were
used to compare the risk of hypoglycemia between the 2 days and the Pearson
coefficient
(r)  to  establish  the  correlations  between  the  insulin  doses  and,
respectively the average glucose levels.
The average age was 27.77G4.57, with a glycated hemoglobin of 7.6%G0.9%
and 11.22G6.38 age of diabetes. There were strong correlations in the total (rZ
0.858), basal
(rZ0.784) and prandial (rZ0.884) insulin doses between the
2 days. Also, a weak positive correlation (rZ0.473) between the average glucose
levels in the 2 days was observed. According to OR there is a 4.375 higher risk of
developing a hypoglycemic event in the day with physical activity (RRZ75%).
Our study confirms that physical activity it is an important risk factor for
hypoglycemia  in  type
1
diabetes  athletes.  Our  study  also  suggests  that
individualized strategies (including higher insulin doses reductions and proper
carbs intake) are needed to avoid hypoglycemia and increase the athlete’s
performances.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP469
EP470
Type 2 diabetes and obesity
Fafa Nadira1,2, Meskine Djamila1,2, Kedad Lamia1,2 & Fedala Saida1,2
1Laboratory of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Algiers, Algeria;2Ibn Ziri
Bologhine Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Introduction
Type 2 diabetes is one of the most common not transmised disease in the world.
Obesity is the main risk factor for type 2 diabetes. Both conditions are responsible
of a significant increase in morbidity and mortality.
The aim of our study was to determine the prevalence of diabetes and fasting
hyperglycemia in the general population and to compare this prevalence in obese
and non-obese subjects.
Methods
This is a descriptive and analytical cross-sectional study conducted among a
sample of individuals aged between 18 and 64 years living in the province of
Algiers. The diabetes is defined by blood glucose levels O1.26 g/l in fasting
blood twice or O2 g/l whatever the time of day. The IFG is defined by a fasting
glucose between 1.10 and 1.26 g/l.
Results
Our survey covered a sample of 2210 individuals (1583 men and 627 women).
- The average blood glucose is 1.023 g/l (0.24-1.8).
- A moderate fasting hyperglycemia is found in 15.52% of individuals.
- A history of known diabetes was found in 7.65% of individuals.
- A diabetes mellitus was detected in 11.45% of sample.
The multi-varied analysis of subjects with global obesity
(BMIO30 kg/m2)
showed that the known diabetics were not more obese than non-diabetics: OR
1.17
(95% CI 0.77-1.78) PZ0.471. The pre diabetics and diabetes screened
during our survey are more obese than non-diabetics. Pre diabetes: ORZ1.4 (95%
CI  1.04-1.87)  P!0.02.  Diabetics  screened:  ORZ1.4
(95%  CI  1.67-3.17)
P!0.001.
Concerning abdominal obesity (IDF criteria) the same observation was made for
known diabetics with global obesity OR Z1.22 (95% CI 0.66-1.188) PO0.05.
Pre- diabetics screened have not more risk for abdominal obesity than non-
diabetic OR Z1.25 (95% CI 0.91-1.72) PO0.05 unlike screened diabetes OR Z
1.62
(95% CI 1.68-2.42) PZ0.018.
Conclusion
Obesity plays a key role in the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes, early treatment
of obesity is essential in the prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP470
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP471
Prevalence of dyslipidemia screened by Accutrend GCT
Fafa Nadira1,2, Meskine Djamila1,2, Fedala Saida1,2 & Kedad Lamia1,2
1Laboratory of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Algiers, Algeria;2IBN Ziri
Bologhine Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Introduction
Obesity and especially abdominal obesity is therefore often associated with
atherogenic dyslipidemia which lead to cardiovascular complications.
The  aim  of  our  study  was  to  analyze  the  distribution  of  cholesterol  and
triglycerids and to determine the prevalence of dyslipidemia in the Algerian adult
population and their variation depending on the presence or absence of obesity.
Methodology
Capillary  samples  using  a  validated  lipids  player
(Accutrend  GCT)  were
performed in 2210 individuals randomly selected from the general population.
High cholesterol is defined by a fasting cholesterol (fasting 12 h)O2 g/l. The
hypertriglyceridemia is defined by a triglyceride levels after 12 h of fasting
O1.5 g/l, or a person treated to dyslipidemia.
Results
The mean fasting total cholesterol in our sample was 1.70 g/l (1-2.4).
The Average fasting triglycerids is 1.15 g/l (0.39-2.69). A known history of
dyslipidemia was rated at 7.06% of subjects. A Dyslipidemia was detected in
26.11% of the individuals in our population.
The Comparison of the obese group with the non-obese group found a clear
predominance of the prevalence in known and screened dyslipidemia in the obese
group (global obesity and android) especially in men.
In multi-analysis varied patients with known and screened dyslipidemia are more
obese than the normolipidemic
OR1 known 2.4 (95% CI 1.59-3.63) P!0.001.
OR2 screened 1.63 (95% CI 1.27-2.08) P!0.001.
When we analyzed abdominal obesity (IDF) known and screened dyslipidemic
subjects are also more obese than subjects with normal lipid profile.
Known OR1 2.27 (95% CI 1.24-4.15) P!0.001.
OR2 screened1.8 (95% CI 1.38-2.62) P!0.001.
Conclusion
Dyslipidemia is a frequent complication of obesity that must be screened to
prevent installatation of cardiovascular complications that often have impli-
cations for high morbidity and mortality and a significant financial cost.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP471
EP472
Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus have an elevated prevalence of
cardiovascular disease
Jose Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1 & Carmen Maria Cortes-Salazar2
1Department of Endocrinology, Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital,
Málaga, Spain;2Badolatosa Primary Care Centre, Seville, Spain.
Objectives
To evaluate the prevalence of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and associated risk
factors in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) attended in a rural
primary care setting.
Methods
Cross-sectional study which included patients with T2DM followed in a rural
primary care setting. Data about several cardiovascular risk factors was collected
(age, sex, smoking, hypertension and dyslipidemia). Also, data about coronary
heart disease (CHD) and cerebrovascular disease was gathered.
Results
Seventy-nine patients were included in this study, with a mean duration of T2DM
of 5.9 years (S.D. 5), mean age 70.1 years (DE 11.8), 63.3% males, and mean BMI
30.8 kg/m2
(DE  11.8).
17.7%  of  patients  had  CHD,  and  prevalence  of
cerebrovascular  disease  was
12.7%.  Regarding  cardiovascular  risk  factors,
smoking was found in 11%, hypertension in 78.5% and dyslipidemia in 54.4% of
patients.
Conclusions
Most patients with T2DM attended in a rural setting have an elevated prevalence
of cardiovascular risk factors and CVD is frequent, especially coronary heart
disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP472
EP473
Insulin secretion several years after type 1 diabetes diagnosis: case
reports
Ana Margarida Monteiro, Silvia Paredes & Marta Alves
Department of Endocrinology, Hospital de Braga, Braga, Portugal.
Introduction
Currently, type 1 diabetes (T1D) is defined by the autoimmune destruction of the
pancreatic b cells that culminates in dependence on exogenous insulin, typically
1-3 years after diagnosis. This ability to maintain a residual function of pancreatic
b cells is, however, heterogeneous, appearing to be worst if the disease is early
diagnosed. Recently, it was demonstrated that many type 1 diabetic patients
produce small amounts of insulin decades after diagnosis.
Clinical cases
Case 1: Male, 42-years-old, diagnosed with T1D 18 years before. Currently on an
insulin pump, he has reasonable metabolic control and no known complications.
He has controlled hypertension and dyslipidemia. He was submitted to elective
laparoscopic cholecystectomy that complicated with choleperitonitis. During
postoperative period, under glycosylated fluids but nil per os, he remained
without exogenous insulin administration for 7 days, with controlled blood
glucose levels and without ketonemia.
Case 2: Female, 32-years-old, diagnosed with diabetes at age 19. At 29-years-old,
because of a chronic poor metabolic control under irregular treatment with oral
antidiabetic  agents,  she  was  referred  to  Endocrinology  consultation.  The
investigation showed positive anti-GAD antibodies and a history compatible
with T1D. She began insulin therapy with slight improvement in metabolic
control due to lack of adherence. However, in periods of good therapeutic
adhesion, glycemic control was relatively easy and predictable. She was recently
hospitalized with diabetic ketoacidosis (first known episode).
Conclusion
The residual insulin production, detectable by the assay of C-peptide and its
functional and clinical significance have been recently discussed. According to
recent evidence, these cases show us that insulin production in type 1 diabetic
patients can be kept for many years after diagnosis and that the end of the ‘honey-
moon phase’ does not necessarily lead to the absence of insulin production.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP473
EP474
Pregnancy diabetes in a patient with phenylketonuria: when the diet is
complicated
Montserrat Gonzalo Marin, Francisco Jose Sanchez Torralbo,
Inmaculada Gonzalez Molero, Virginia Morillas Jimenez, Jose Abuin
Fernandez, Victoria Contreras Bolivar, Gabriel Olveira Fuster &
Francisco Tinahones Madue
˜o
Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Hospital Regional of Málaga, Malaga,
Spain.
Precedents
Thirty-nine year old Woman. Classic phenylketonuria diagnosed for neonatal
screening in Germany. Good adherence to the diet from the infancy, with good
metabolic control. Not response to test with BH4.
Pregnancy  in
2007
with  good  controls  of  phenylalanine
(Phe).  Son  with
congenital cardiopathy.
Evolution
In
2013
she  planed  new  pregnancy,  departing  from  very  good  controls
(!4 mg/dl) and ingestion of 22-24 Phe’s rations and supplements without Phe.
She did Phe and tyrosine controls weekly (Tyr), analysis with plasmatic amino
acids and dietary survey quarterly.
In
24  pregnancy  week  O’Sullivan  test  was  pathological
(164 mg/dl).  Oral
overload of glucose was not tolerated. She had fast glycemias between 99 and
121 mg/dl and postprandial glycemias up to 146-169 mg/dl.
Initially  controlling  the  ingestion  of  carbohydrates  improved  the  glycemic
control. In the third quarter the low levels of Phe and Tyr did necessarily to
increase up to duplicating Phe’s rations. Since the patient could not take proteins
of high biological value, she increased the ingestion of vegetables, potatoes and
changed the cereals, pasta and rice without proteins into others of normal content
into proteins. This implied a deterioration of the glycemic control that derived in
the prescription of Insulin NPH in two doses, and rapid insulin for postprandial
control with good later control. She needed supplementation with tyrosine.
The childbirth was without incidents, with a healthy newborn child. Later she
returned to reduce Phe’s rations of the diet, tyrosine supplement and insulin
therapy was suspended.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Discussion
The syndrome of maternal phenylketonuria appears in children of mothers
affected for seriously or moderated hiperphenylalaninemia with Phe’s plasmatic
high concentrations during the previous months and/or the gestation. It involves
in  the  fetus  mental  delay,  microcephaly,  cardiac  malformations,  atresia  of
esophagus and dismorfias facial, between others. The Phe crosses the placenta and
high concentrations of the same one are difficultly metabolizables due to the foetal
immaturity. It is indispensable to contribute quantity of proteins and energy
adapted and to evaluate the contribution of proteins of formula without Phe. We
report a case in the one that is necessary to be increasing Phe’s rations based on
food and supplements rich in carbohydrates, which complicates the managing of
the pregnancy diabetes and it us forces the insulinoterpy, since it is not possible to
reduce the ingestion of carbohydrates because a minor caloric contribution in
patients with phenylketonuria would worsen Phe’s levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP474
EP475
‘Metabolic endotoxemia’ in the presence and absence of type 2 diabetes
mellitus
Lilit Egshatyan1,3, Olga Tkacheva1, Sergey Boytsov1 & Georgy Osipov2
1FSI ‘National Research Center for Preventive Medicine’ of the Ministry
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia;2Institute of Organic
Chemistry, Moscow, Russia;3Moscow State University of Medicine and
Dentistry named after A.I. Evdokimov, Moscow, Russia.
Background
Type  2  diabetes  mellitus
(T2DM)  is  a  condition  of  multi-factorial  origin,
involving several molecular mechanisms related to the intestinal micro-biota for
its  development.  The  micro-biota  able  to  favor  systemic  exposure  to  the
lipopolysaccharides (LPS), large glycolipids derived from the outer membrane of
Gram-negative bacteria. LPS can cause a condition of ‘metabolic endotoxemia’
characterized by low-grade inflammation, insulin resistance.
Design
We performed a study in 21 individuals (10 T2DM patients, 11 controls) mean
age 56.12G13.2 years and analyzed the relationship between LPS and body mass
index (BMI), age, lipoproteins, serum fasting glucose, glycated hemoglobin
(HbA1c), parameters of low-grade inflammation.
Results
These groups not differed significantly in terms of total serum cholesterol (TC),
low-density lipoprotein (LDL), high-density lipoprotein (HDL), triglyceride (TG),
interleukin (IL)-6, C-reactive protein (CRP), BMI and age. Group ‘without T2DM’
and group ‘with T2DM’ significantly differed in terms of HbA1c level (4.3G
0.23% vs 7.56G0.47%, PZ0.0005). Plasma LPS levels in T2DM patients
(0.46G0.31 nmol/ml) were significantly different from those in controls (0.29G
0.12 nmol/ml), PZ0.034.
Significant relationship between LPS and glucose (r(s)Z0.3; PZ0.026), LPS and
HbA1c (r(s)Z0.64; PZ0.0049) in all patients were revealed. After separate in
groups significant relationship between LPS and glucose (r(s)Z0.4; PZ0.003),
HbA1c (r(s)Z0.72; PZ0.034) in T2DM patients were revealed. In controls
significant relationship were not revealed.
Conclusions
T2DM patients show higher LPS level, which significant relationship with the
levels of fasting glucose and HbA1c unlike control group. Due to the small
number of patients in the group we did not find a relationship between LPS and
low-grade inflammation, lipoproteins.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP475
EP476
Mast cell a new player in Type 2 diabetes
Nehal Hammdy1, Randa Salam1, Negwa Abd El Ghaffar2 &
Eman Mahmoud2
1Cairo University, Internal Medicine, Cairo, Egypt;2National Research
Center, Department of Clinical and Chemical Pathology, Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction
Mast cells are critical effectors in inflammatory diseases, including cardiovascular
and metabolic diseases and their associated complications. These cells exert their
physiological  and  pathological  activities  by  releasing  granules  containing
histamine, cytokines, chemokines, and proteases, including mast cell-specific
chymases and tryptases.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Aim of the study
To detect the role of mast cell in diabetic obese and correlation to different
diabetic complications.
Subject and method
Seventy Type 2 diabetic obese patients attending the Diabetes and Endocrinology
clinic in Kasr El Ani hospital compared to 15 healthy control.
Full medical history, complete physical examination, Anthropometric measure-
ments (BMI, waist circumference) Michigan neuropathy score, Echo  heart,
fundus examination, fasting glucose-HbA1C - serum cholesterol - triglycerides-
LDL-HDL(assessed after 12 h fasting) A/C ratio and Typtase level.
Results
Statistical difference between  patients  and control  regarding BMI,  glucose,
cholesterol, HDL, LDL, tryptase (P!0.001), triglycerides (PZ0.001). Tryptase
correlated with BMI, fasting glucose, HbA1C, triglycerides which is statistically
significant
(PZ0.014,  rZ0.031)/(PZ0.012,  rZ0.297)/(P!0.001,  rZ0.862),
(PZ0.039, rZ0.247). Tryptase is higher in patients with complication mean
value
(39.32G4.9) ng/ml. Four patients with retinopathy, six patients with
peripheral  neuropathy,  three  patients  diabetic  nephropathy,  eight  patients
ischeamic heart disease , three patients with cerebro vascular disease.
Highest level in patients with diabetic nephropathy mean (38.2G3.7) ng/ml.
Conclusion
Tryptase participate in the pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus and its complication
targeting mast cells as novel therapy for diabetes requires further investigations.
Keywords: Diabetes, mast cells tryptase, complication.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP476
EP477
Knowledge, and behaviors of Albanian nurses in primary care toward
diabetes mellitus type 2 risk factors reduction
Alba Themeli & Edmond Pistja
Medical Training Center Santa Maria, Lezhe, Albania.
Introduction
The rising incidence of diabetes mellitus type 2 in Albania intensifies the need for
effective health education for diabetes risk factors reduction among nurses and
other health care practitioners.
Purpose
The purpose of this study was to develop a description of nurses’ knowledge about,
attitudes toward, practice behaviors related to Diabetes mellitus type 2 risk reduction.
Methods
We surveyed 50 primary care nurses in 10 health centers in northwestern Albania
located in two cities in Lezhe and Shkoder). The data was collected over five weeks
and was analyzed using descriptive analysis.
Results
The majority of the surveyed nurses could identify common risk factors for diabetes
type 2 and had positive attitudes toward diabetes risk reduction.
However, !62% of the respondents could correctly answer questions about
evidence-based recommendations for diabetes mellitus type 2 risk reduction. This
sample of albanian nursing professionals lacked knowledge critical to providing
guidance to individuals with or at risk for diabetes.
Conclusions
However this is a small scale study and further investigation need to be done.
More intensive and creative approaches to the education of nursing professionals
regarding diabetes mellitus type 2 risk factors reduction are recommended.
Keywords: diabetes mellitus type 2, nurses, education, Albania.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP477
EP478
Evaluation of metabolic parameters of gestational diabetics in
postpartum period
Fatih Turker1, Suleyman Ahbab1, Esra Ataoglu1, Betul Cavusoglu Turker1
& Evrim Cakir2
1Haseki Training and Research Hospital, Internal Medicine Clinic, Istanbul,
Turkey;2Haseki Training and Research Hospital, Endocrinology Division,
Istanbul, Turkey.
Background
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is the high blood glucose levels in pregnant
women. GDM have high risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus after pregnancy.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Therefore, we evaluated postpartum DM frequency and metabolic parameters of
the patients who had GDM in this study.
Methods
It was enrolled 40 patients, who had high glucose level during fasting or/and after
meal and abnormal glucose level during OGTT in 24-28 weeks, in endocrinology
outpatient between 2011-2014. We evaluated metabolic parameters of GDM in
the sixth month of postpartum period.
Weight, height, BMI were evaluated. Blood tests were performed (fasting and
after meal glucose level, insulin, lipid profile, hbA1c, urea, creatinine, spot urea
protein/creatinine).
Results
Postpartum diabetes mellitus was developed in seven patients in follow up period
(17.5%). The median age of the postnatal diabetics is 33.14G6.4, the postnatal
nondiabetics median age is 34.48G5.7. Mean fasting glucose level and hbA1c
values were statistically higher in postpartum diabetic patients, 125.14G49.421,
6.243G1.41, P:0.001, P:0.005, respectively. The mean BMI, waist circumfer-
ence, triglyseride levels of the postpartum diabetic patients are 31.47G8.91, 99G
16.381,
165.271G127.499,  of  nondiabetics  are
29.13G4.4,
96.45G13.44,
102.706G68.525.  There  is  no  significant  difference  between  BMI,  waist
circumference, triglyseride level of two groups. (P:0.521, P:0.607, P:0.240).
Conclusion
There was not a precise finding to forsee permanent diabetes mellitus after
pregnancy in GDM patients according to our study. Moreover, GDM enhances
risk of postpartum ongoing diabetes mellitus.
Table 1 Comparison of metabolic and laboratory parameters of study
groups
Group A - GDM
Group B - GDM
with initial
with initial
vitamin D
vitamin D
%20 ng/ml (n: 17)   O20 ng/ml (n: 21)
P value
Age
33.50G3.90
31.82G5.01
0.244
Weight in first trimester (kg)
70.61G7.91
66.47G13.22
0.241
Weight in peripartum (kg)
80.57G7.67
76.06G12.56
0.294
BMI (kg/m2)
28.37G4.06
25.62G5.60
0.033
Fasting blood glucose (mg/dl)
96.17G13.51
89.93G10.63
0.341
HbA1c in peripartum (%)
5.51G0.54
5.04G0.48
0.006
Insulin (U/l)
9.21G3.12
12.44G4.95
0.027
HOMA-IR
1.92G0.93
2.82G1.34
0.297
50 gr OGTT - 1. hour (mg/dl)
165.19G20.32
176.15G16.02
0.856
100 gr OGTT - fasting glucose
102.06G16.56
93.21G12.55
0.438
(mg/dl)
100 gr OGTT - 1. hour (mg/dl)
221.18G45.22
218.10G26.31
0.296
100 gr OGTT - 2. hour (mg/dl)
175.04G49.51
165.89G45.57
0.707
100 gr OGTT - 3. hour (mg/dl)
102.33G51.89
128.08G46.11
0.165
Free T4 hormone
0.72G0.25
0.75G0.24
0.641
Thyroid stimulant hormone
1.27G0.82
3.06G3.41
0.042
Anti thyroid peroxidase anticore
43.36G140.67
35.50G71.49
0.957
Anti thyroglobulin anticore
32.96G33.60
100.55G279.46
0.789
Parathormone
27.08G15.44
27.29G12.83
0.056
Calcium (mg/dl)
9.22G0.36
9.15G0.54
0.977
Phosphate (mg/dl)
3.90G0.63
3.68G0.92
0.486
Albumin (mg/dl)
3.74G0.21
3.61G0.42
0.241
Table 2 Spearman’s correlation results between vitamin D and metabolic
parameters
HbA1c in
Fasting Blood
BMI
Peripartum
Glucose
HOMA-IR
Vitamin D
R
K0.377
K0.424
K0.202
0.147
P
0.030
0.014
0.232
0.386
N
33
33
37
37
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP478
EP479
How changed face of gestational diabetes mellitus within 12 years in
Turkey
Nevin Dinccag1, Cemile Idiz1, Sevda Ozel2, Selda Gedik1, Nurdan Gul1,
Fulya Turker1, Sakin Tekin1, Seher Tanrikulu1, Hulya Hacisahinoglu1 &
Ayse Uzum1
1Istanbul University Endocrinology and Metabolism Department, Istanbul,
Turkey;2Istanbul University Biostatistics and Informatics, Istanbul, Turkey.
Backgrounds and aims
We aimed to determine final status of carbohydrate (CHO) intolerance of women
with GDM who were followed between 3 months and 10 years after delivery.
Materials and methods
Two hundred and fourty participants with GDM history were enrolled into study
and divided into two groups. [Group I: 40 women (38.0G6.3 years) who had
delivery before 11G2 years ago, Group II: 200 women (34.0G5.1 years) who had
delivery within 3-6 months]. Final status of a participants was evaluated with
75 g OGTT and compared the features of groups according to possible risk factors
indicating CHO intolerance.
Results
Group I
Group II
P*
n
40
200
Age-at-gestation (yrs)
28.7G5.7
34.0G3.1
0.001
BMI (kg/m2)
30.5G3.8
29.7G2.5
0.126
Family history of DM (n)
2.0G1.9
1.8G1.9
0.587
Multiparity
1.5G1.6
0.8G0.9
0.004
At diagnosis A1C (%)
5.0G1.0
5.5G0.5
0.093
At diagnosis OGTT glucose (mg/dl)
Fasting
100.8G23.5
93.6G11.8
0.148
1.st h
212.6G44.4
198.6G26.9
0.036
2.nd h
194.0G50.0
165.4G38.3
0.003
3rd h
133G45.2
122.5G37.3
0.559
Gestational week at
29.6G5.8
27.3G4.9
0.022
diagnosis
Weight gain (kg)
11.8G4.8
9.6G4.5
0.006
Delivery time
38.2G1.3
38.4G1.6
0.018
Fetus of birth
Length (cm)/Weight (kg)
50.2G2.4/3355.0G547.5
47.5G3.2/3181.6G543.5
!0.001/0.033
Head circumference (cm)
36.0G5.9
34.7G5.6
0.250
Final HOMA-IR
2.8G1.7
1.4G1.1
!0.001
Final status of CHO
tolerance n(%)
Normal/IFGCIGT/DM
23
(57.5)/8 (20)/9(22.5)
177(88.5)/19(9.5)/4(2.0)
Conclusions
In our country; as compared today, 12 years ago women used to became pregnant at
younger ages but diagnosis was possible at later weeks of pregnancy, delivery time
was early, maternal weight gain during gestation and fetal weight at birth were
high. Postpartum follow-up of GDM after delivery is important. Although CHO
intolerance  normalizes  soon after  delivery  in  most women; it may  sustain
immediately after delivery and the frequency may be increased in the follow up
years.  Having  multiparity  and  high BMI;  obtaining  high  glucose  levels  at
diagnosis, are crucial predictors of development of GDM but also we can conclude
that the frequency of GDM increases as follow-up years after delivery increases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP479
EP480
Does education effect the rates of prophylactic vaccination in elderly
diabetics?
Mustafa Altay1, Ihsan Ates1, Fatma Aybala Altay2, Mustafa Kaplan1,
Omer Akca1 & Adem Ozkara1
1Numune Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Diskapi
Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
This study is performed for inspecting vaccination rates in geriatric patients,
negatory effects leading to unvaccination and changes occuring in vaccination
rates by patient education.
Methods
This study is planned in a combination of two formats: retrospectively for
determining last 5 years’ vaccination rates of patients and prospectively for
determining the change in vaccination rates after patient education. Totally 579
diabetic patients, 206 patients of 65 years and over (group 1) and 373 patients
under 65 years (group 2) were admitted to the study.
Results
Among preeducational reasons of avoiding vaccination, not to need vaccination
was more frequently seen in group 2 when compared to group 1 (98.1% vs 91.7%,
P!0.001). Pneumococ, influenzae and hepatitis vaccination rates all increased
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
after education in the whole study population. (1.4% vs 12.4%, 12.1% vs 36.6%,
0.5% vs 3.8%, respectively; P!0.001).
Conclusions
It is seen that giving detailed information to geriatric patients about necessary
vaccines and removing suspicions and anxiety about vaccination (about adverse
events,  for  example)  makes  the  vaccination  rates  raise.  Primarily  health
professionals should be educated for this aim and they shouldn’t withhold the
effort to give sufficient education to patients on time.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP480
EP481
Influence of obesity and carbohydrate metabolism disorders in GLP-1
levels in women with history of gestational diabetes mellitus
Silvia Maraver-Selfa, Maria Jose Picón-César, Maria Molina-Vega,
Isabel Mancha-Doblas & Francisco Tinahones-Madue
˜o
Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Victoria, Málaga, Spain.
Introduction
There is a reduction of the incretin effect in patients with type
2 diabetes
secondary to altered secretion of incretin hormones and/or failed of its action.
Objective
To study the GLP-1 secretion pattern after an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
in postpartum reassessment of women with previous GDM.
Materials and methods
Prospective epidemiological study of 48 women with a history of GDM. We
evaluated age, history of GDM or macrosomia, family history of diabetes, insulin
therapy use, birth weight and type of delivery; 13G1 months after childbirth, we
reassessed clinical-analytical characteristics and performed a 75-g OGTT. We
measured glucose, insulin and GLP-1 levels (basal-30-60-1200 ). Classification of
patients was based on OGTT: normal vs prediabetic/diabetic and based on BMI:
obese
(IMCR30 kg/m2)  vs  non-obese.  Differences  between  groups  were
analyzed using Mann-Whitney and c2 tests.
Results
Patients mean age 35G5 years, BMI 29G6 kg/m2, A1c 5.5G0.3%, HOMA-IR
2.2G1.4. Women with pathological OGTT needed insulin therapy more often
during pregnancy and had higher levels of insulin resistance, but they did not
differ  significantly  from  those  with  non-pathological  OGTT  in  metabolic
syndrome characteristics although they had higher cholesterol and triglycerides
levels. There were no significant differences in GLP-1 basal levels and after the
OGTT  between  groups.  Obese  women  had  significantly  higher  basal  and
postprandial insulin, HOMA-IR and HOMA-b with no differences in glucose
levels, and lower levels of basal and postprandial GLP-1 than non-obese.
Conclusions
Women  with  a  history  of  GDM  and  prediabetes/diabetes  in  postpartum
reassessment do not differ in GLP-1 secretion after OGTT of healthy patients.
However, obese patients have lower incretinic response after OGTT compared
with non-obese.
The defect in incretinic secretion does not help to explain the pathogenesis of
diabetes that occurs after GDM.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP481
EP482
Unstable expression of GPRC6A in human pancreatic b-cells
Silvia Perego1, Veronica Sansoni1, Giuseppe Banfi1,2 &
Giovanni Lombardi1
1I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Laboratory of Experimentak
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Milano, Italy;2Vita-Salute San
Raffaele University, Milano, Italy.
Introduction
GPRC6A is a widely expressed seven-transmembrane G-protein coupled receptor
mediating L-a-amino acids signaling (mainly, arginine, lysine, and ornithine),
which  has  been  proposed  as  receptor  for  osteocalcin.  By  interacting  with
GPRC6A, in b-cells, osteocalcin is thought to modulate the glucose-induced
insulin secretion. However, GPRC6A functions have been studied only in rodents
or in rodents-derived cells.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Aim of this study was to characterize the GPRC6A expression in different culture
conditions in 1.1B4 cells, a human model of pancreatic b-cells.
Methods
1.1B4 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS.
To evaluate GPRC6A expression cells were seeded at different densities, from
2000 to 40 000/cm2 and harvested every day over 7 days.
At the end of the experiments total RNA was extracted, reverse transcribed to
cDNA and amplified through PCR by means of GPRC6A specific primers. In
parallel GPRC6A protein expression in cell lysates was evaluated by western
blotting.
Results
Our results show that at low cell densities (2000-5000/cm2) GPRC6A expression
was kept very low over the culture period. Instead, at higher cell densities
(O10 000/cm2) the expression level is increased over time parallel to the cell
growth, and it remained stable from day 4 up to day 7. Western blotting results,
however, differed from gene expression data since from day 3 the protein level
remained stable.
Conclusions
GPRC6A expression in 1.1B4 human pancreatic b-cells is very unstable and it is
strikingly dependent on seeding cell density and days on cultures.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP482
EP483
Estimation risk model as a new method of insulin-induced
lipohypertrophy diagnostics in diabetic patients
Natalya Volkova, Ilya Davidenko, Maria Porksheyan & Julya Rudakova
Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia.
Introduction
Lipohypertrophy (LH) is a chronic complication of diabetes mellitus that caused
by frequent subcutaneous injections of insulin. Nowadays, LH were modified due
to good quality modern insulin and expansion their concentration. As a result,
some difficulties of diagnosis were appeared.
Design
The aim of this study has been to develop the estimation risk model of insulin
induced LH in diabetic patients. This study was done on 140 diabetic patients
(89 females and 51 males) who had been under the treatment with insulin a mean
8 years. Observation and palpation techniques, as well as ultrasonography of
subcutaneous fat were used in assessing LH in these diabetics. All patients were
divided into two groups. First group included 117 patients with LH, second - 23
diabetics without LH. Further, all LH risk factors were statistically processed
using Spearman’s, Kendall tau, Gamma rank correlation coefficients and binary
logistic regression. Results were statistically significant when P!0.05.
Results
All risk factors were analyzed using rank correlation coefficients on first stage.
Statistically insignificant parameters were eliminated (PO0.05). Ten factors from
23 were remained after first stage. Further, 10 parameters were subjected to ROC-
analysis. Measure AUC was determined. All risk factors had high predictive value
(AUCO0.5). So, they were used to development the estimation risk model. On
the basis of binary logistic regression the estimation risk model was created.
Predictive value of model was 86% taking into account threshold cut-off 0.3 and
confidence interval 95%. Efficacy of estimation risk model were tested on 34
diabetic patients.
Conclusions
Nowadays, LH remains severe insulinotherapy complication. Primary prevention is
necessary for diabetic patients with pathologic areas of subcutaneous fat. Therefore,
we developed the estimation risk model with good quality and high predictive value
(86%) for diabetic patients who are under the treatment with insulin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP483
Diabetes complications
EP484
Association of the PPARG2 Pro12Ala, TNFa G(308)A and G(238)A,
Lipc C(-514)T, Ace I/D, Slco1b1 Val174ala polymorphism with
endothelial function and atorvastatin response in type 2 diabetic
patients
Nadezhda Lebedeva1, Olga Vikulova1, Alexei Nikitin2,
Minara Shamkhalova1, Marina Shestakova1 & Dedov II1,2
1Endocrinology Research Centre, Ministry of Health of Russia, Moscow,
Russia;2Federal Research Clinical Center of Federal Medical and
Biological Agency of Russia, Moscow, Russia.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Aim
To assess the association of the endothelial dysfunction (ED) parameters and the
lipid-lowering response to atorvastatin therapy in patients with T2D with genetic
markers of inflammation.
Methods
We include 97 T2D patients with first prescribed atorvastatin 10-20 mg: M/F
26/71; mean age 57 years. After 12 month of statin therapy, patients had fasting
lipid profiles and ED parameters repeated. For ED evaluation, we performed pulse
wave analysis with reactive hyperemia by peripheral arterial tonometry. The
genotypes were identified by PCR in real time with the TaqMan probes for a
complex of polymorphic markers. Statistic analysis was evaluated using the
Mann-Whitney, Wilcoxon tests, P!0.05.
Results
There  was  no  difference  in  total  cholesterol
(TC),  low-density  lipoprotein
cholesterol (LDL-C) levels and ED parameters between the genotypes of studied
genes in statin-untreated subjects. With statin therapy, PPARG2Pro/Pro had
significantly TC, LDL-C lowering compared with PPARG2Pro/Ala, PPARG2
Ala/Ala patients (for TC: 20.74% vs 4.6% and 5.61%; PZ0.04, respectively; for
LDL-C: 26.00% vs 6.11% and 7.32%; PZ0.029, respectively). The carries GG of
TNFa G(238)A and GA of TNFa G(308)A had significantly greater in amplitude
of postocclusive wave increase (Apw) compared with the carries GA of TNFa
G(238)A and GG of TNFa G(308)A (C8.16% vs K0.93%, PZ0.04;C44% vs
K4.4%, PZ0.004,  respectively). The percentage  of Apw and TC, LDL-C
improvement did not depend on age, diabetes duration, basal lipids levels and
HbA1c but it depend on genotypes distribution of TNF-a G(238)A and G(308)A
and PPARG2  Pro12Ala, respectively. There  was  no statistically significant
association between ED and atorvastatin response with other studied markers.
Conclusion
PPARG2 Pro12Ala polymorphism accounts for interindividual variability of
response to statin therapy in patients with T2D. Significant association of TNF-a
gene polymorphism with ED in T2D suggests an important role of inflammation
in the genesis of MVD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP484
EP485
Acupuncture treatment for diabetic gastroparesis
Iryna Kostitska
Ivano-Frankivsk, Ukraine.
Introduction
The aim of this study was to compare the effectiveness acupuncture for the
treatment of diabetic gastroparesis (DG). Acupuncture may improve gastrointes-
tinal symptoms in patients with various disorders, but its efficacy in diabetic
gastroparesis is unclear.
Materials and methods
We have studied 23 subjects with type 2 DM with the duration of 14.2G3.1 years,
with longstanding and uncontrolled carbohydrate metabolism (mean value of
HbA1C was 8.6G1.3%) and symptoms of gastroparesis. All patients divided into
two groups: diabetic with symptoms of gastroparesis (consisted of 11 participants
(4
male/7 female), mean age was 46.8G7.4 years, mean BMI was 25.2G
1.2 kg/m2) received itopride hydrochloride (daily doses K50 mg) for 3 weeks and
second group patients with confirmed diagnosis of DG (12 patients (5 male/7
female),  mean  age  was 45.9G6.5  years,  mean  BMI was 27.4G4.6 kg/m2)
assigned to biweekly acupuncture treatments during 21 days. Gastric emptying
rate, glucose and glycated haemoglobin (HbA1C) levels were measured at start
and end of each treatment period. The patients completed the Gastroparesis
Cardinal Symptom Index (GCSI). No subjects studied have had the signs of other
disorders of dysfunction in gastrointestinal motility.
Results
In the first group was no change in any of the outcome parameters after 3 weeks of
the treatment with itopride hydrochloride. Acupuncture was associated with a
decrease in scores for almost all cardinal symptoms of the GCSI and associated
with significantly greater reductions in gastric retention with help of13C-octanoic
breast test (13C-OBT) (K6.1G7.0%; 95% CI K13.3% to K6.1; P!0.01). There
were  no  significant  differences  in  fasting  blood  glucose  levels  between
symptomatic therapy (itopride hydrochloride) and acupuncture treatments.
Conclusions
In patients with DG, 3 weeks of acupuncture reduces gastric retention and
improves gastroparesis symptoms. It appears that this effect may be due to non-
specific mechanisms.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP485
EP486
The dual burden of tuberculosis and diabetes in hospitalized Spanish
patients
Alejandra Duran, Beatriz Calvo, Manuel Mendez, Ana Ortola,
Irene Crespo & Javier Marco
Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
Aims
The dual burden of tuberculosis (TBC) and diabetes (DM) has attracted much
attention in the past decade. Patients with type 2 diabetes have a higher risk of
developing pulmonary tuberculosis; moreover, DM co-morbidity in pulmonary
TB is associated with poor treatment outcomes. Patients admitted to Internal
Medicine (IM) Departments are an ideal setting to analyze the prognostic roll of
DM on TBC clinical course.
Material and method
The Minimum Basic Data Set (MBDS) from all discharges of IM patients from
public hospitals in Spain (2005-2011) was analyzed. All patients with a TBC
diagnosis were selected (codes CIE 9-MC) comparing those with and without
DM. The adjusted Charlson index was used as a measure of patient comorbidity.
Univariate and bivariate statistical analysis was performed where a P!0.005 was
considered significant.
Results
A total of 25 367 patients with TBC were identified; 9.2% had also a diagnosis of
DM2. Patients with DM2 had higher mortality than non-DM patients (7.7% vs
4.8%; P!0.01). Hypoglycaemia was registered in 150 cases, also with higher
mortality.
Conclusions
In our study TBC patients admitted to Spanish hospitals in the presence of
DM2  and  also  those  with  hypoglycaemia  showed  an  increased  mortality.
The extra-pulmonary and spread forms are also relatively frequent (O30%) in
subjects with DM2.
Early  screening  of  DM2
and/or  treatment  with  tight  glycemic  control  in
individuals  hospitalized  for  TBC  might  be  able  to  decrease  the  mortality
associated in patients with both diagnoses on admission. Patients with diabetes
with a poor treatment adherence and a HbA1C O6% could be a risk group for
developing TBC, probably due to the long term immunosuppressive state thus
generated. Recent studies indicate that the coexistence of DM and TB alters the
distribution of the cell populations in the immune system, although large cross-
sectional trials are required.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.EP486
EP487
Improvement of finger amputation technique in the treatment of
diabetic foot
Maksym Prystupiuk, Iuliia Onofriichuk, Liudmyla Naumova,
Lev Prystupiuk, Marianna Naumova & Oleksandr Prystupiuk
Bogomolets National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Introduction
Diabetic foot is one of the leading disabling chronic complications of diabetes.
From  40  to  60%  (and  in  some  regions  up  to  90%)  of  all  non-traumatic
amputations are performed in patients with diabetes. According to international
epidemiological studies, the incidence of amputations reaches 206 cases per 100
thousand. In Ukraine in 2015, up to 2656 lower limb amputations were performed
in patients with diabetes, which is 0.62 persons per 10 000 of population.
Methods
Amputations were performed in 31 diabetics with neuropathic and neuroishemic
diabetic foot forms, including 11 males of 60.50G1.50 years old and 20 females
of 70.95G1.45 years old. A control group composed 30 patients. The peculiarity
of the proposed method was the application of silica sorbent on the wound after
finger amputation, without suturing the wound. The next day, when the dressing
was removed, the wound was debrided using ultrasonic cavitation system with
continuous observation of the wound and application of vacuum therapy. The
next step was plastic closure of the wound.
Results
The average length of stay of the research patients at the hospital before a plastic
closure of wound was 15.50G1.12 days, while the duration of the control group
was averaged 24.42G0.13 days.
Conclusions
1) Implementation of the proposed method of surgery eliminates the need for high
amputations in patients with diabetic foot.
2) The proposed method of surgical treatment using the vacuum dressings in
patients with diabetic foot eliminates the need for additional surgical procedures.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
3) Combined surgical treatment of purulent complications of the foot using
vacuum therapy helps to twice speed up cleaning of the wound and reduces
surgical treatment duration in 1.6 times.
4) Improved technique of the surgical treatment of the foot with the preservation
of its bearing capacity is recommended for implementation in treatment of
purulent-necrotic complications of diabetic foot.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP487
EP488
Does type 2 diabetes mellitus affect bone mineral density?
Payam Sarmadi1,3, Behnaz Bazrafshan2, Hamidreza Bazrafshan1,3,
Gunter Stalla3, Mehrdad Aghaei4, Hossien Shadpourdashti4,
Fatemeh Mousavi1 & Mamak Eftekharie1
1Toloo Endocrine Clinic, Tehran, Iran;2Medical Cellular and Molecular
Research Center, Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran;
3Neuroendocrinology Group, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich,
Germany;4Joint, Bone & Connective Tissue Research Center, Golestan
University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran.
Introduction
The effects of diabetes mellitus (DM) on bone mineralization and osteoporosis is
not well established. While reduction in bone mineral density in patients with type
1 diabetes is almost confirmed, effects of type 2 diabetes on bone health is still
unclear. However in some studies bone mineral density (BMD) was suggested to
be normal or elevated, epidemiological reports have shown an increased risk of
fracture among patients with type 2 diabetes. This paper tries to report interim
results of the study which was designed to evaluate the probable association
between type 2 diabetes and osteoporosis.
Method
In this study, 1000 subject were selected randomly from patients undergoing bone
densitometry in Gorgan, Iran. Their demographic data, history of concomitant
disease and history of pharmacologic treatment were extracted. Bone mineral
density was assessed by Norland machine at the lumbar and femoral neck. Data of
patients with type 2 diabetes were separated. All data were analyzed by SPSS
software version 16, using T-test.
Results
From the 1000 studied patients, 367 (36.7%) were diabetic. The mean age of
diabetic patients was 56.23 years. 325 (88.55%) of these patients were female. In
diabetic patients, mean T-Score at lumbar spine and femoral neck were K0.60G
7.11 and K1.48G6.80 respectively. Mean BMD value at lumbar spine and
femoral neck were also 0.90G0.23 and 0.75G0.13 respectively. The prevalence
of osteoporosis at lumbar spine and femoral neck of diabetic patients were 31.06
and 38.96%, respectively. The association between DM with BMD and T-score in
the femoral and lumbar areas was not statistically significant (P-value O0.05).
Conclusion
According to our results, it seems that type 2 diabetes mellitus does not affect
bone density and the causes of increased risk of fracture in dieses patients can be
other complications of DM (such as sensory neuropathy or visual impairment)
however further studies are recommended.
Keywords: Bone mineral density, type 2 diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP488
EP489
Risk factors for mortality in elderly diabetic patients with pneumonia
Hakan Kocoglu, Yildiz Okuturlar, Samet Sayilan, Hanise Ozkan,
Deniz Yilmaz, Kamala Ganglaliyeva, Esra Demir, Irem Kirac Utku,
Mehmet Hursitoglu, Ozlem Harmankaya & Abdulbaki Kumbasar
Department of Internal Medicine, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Education and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
In this study we aimed to examine the risk factors associated with mortality of
pneumonia among diabetic seniors in Turkish general population.
Material and methods
After excluding individuals from other minorities, elderly diabetic patients who
had been hospitalized due to pneumonia in recent three years consisted of study
population. A total of 610 subjects aged 65 years or older were retrospectively
analyzed and 196 patients who had no missing information on variables for the
analysis were included. Patients’ age, gender, hospital length of stay (LoS),
mortality, presenting symptoms, other comorbid illnesses, chest X-ray findings,
chest computed tomography (CT) findings, coagulation, complete blood count
(CBC), and chemistry results were recorded and statistically analyzed.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
Female/male ratio was 0.83:1 (45.4% female, 54.6% male). Mean age was
79.03G7.25 years, median LoS was 9 days (range: 1-206 days), and mortality
rate was 18.9%. Gender and age did not have an impact on mortality. In regard to
presenting symptoms only impaired consciousness (PZ0.0001) and impaired
general condition (PZ0.05) were associated with increased mortality. Similarly,
concomitant acute kidney injury (0.026), pretibial edema (0.0001), hypertension
(0.05), chronic heart failure (0.012), atelectasis on chest CT (0.0001), abnormal
levels of gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) (0.033), urea (0.037), creatinine
(0.010) and potassium (0.028) were associated with increased mortality. But
fever,  anemia,  concomitant  coronary  artery  disease,  chronic  renal  failure,
cerebrovascular disease, Alzheimer disease, all chest X-ray and CT findings
(except atelectasis on chest CT) (e.g. right/left effusion, right/left infiltration,
cardiomegaly), abnormal levels of all CBC parameters, AST, ALT, LDH, HbA1c,
uric acid, total protein, albumin, sodium, and calcium were not associated with
increased mortality.
Conclusion
Although diabetes is an independent risk factor for developing pneumonia, our
proposed risk factors should be evaluated in those patients in order to predict
increased mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP489
EP490
Mauriac syndrome - a rare type 1 diabetes mellitus complication and an
opportunity for intervention
Pedro Souteiro1, Sandra Belo1, Maria Manuel Costa1, Fátima Carneiro2 &
Davide Carvalho1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Porto, Portugal;
2Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Mauriac Syndrome is characterized by the presence of hepatomegaly, growth
retardation, delayed puberty and cushingoid features. This entity is traditionally
diagnosed during the work-up of hepatic enzymes alterations in children/young
adults with type
1 diabetes mellitus
(T1DM) with poor glycaemic control.
However, the impact of metabolic control in the normalization of hepatic analytic
profile is not clarified.
Methods and design
Retrospective study of five patients with T1DM with hepatic histopathology
indicative of Mauriac Syndrome.
Results
The mean age of the patients at the diagnosis was 21.2G5.07 years-old, but 4 of
them (80%) already had hepatic enzymes alterations on blood tests performed
1 year before. All the patients had long diagnosed diabetes (16.4G5.60 years), a
poor glycaemic control (HbA1c 12.8G1.99%) and the presence of diabetes-
related microvascular disease. Patients were referred to biopsy due to significant
alterations on the enzymes of hepatic cytolysis: AST 339G368 U/L (reference
value-RV: 10-37) and ALT 243G194 U/L (RV: 10-37). Enzymes of hepatic
cholestasis were discreetly elevated and bilirubins were normal. All patients had
hepatomegaly (21.6G2.97 cm in the midclavicular line) without splenomegaly.
The most frequent histopathological features were cytoplasmatic clarification and
ballooning and nuclear glycogenization. One patient had short stature criteria
(below 3rd percentile on the WHO growth curves) and three others had a stature
that was inferior to the 10th  percentile for their age. Two of the patients had
cushingoid features. After the diagnosis insulin therapy was intensified and
therapy education was reinforced. One year after the diagnosis and the application
of these measures patients presented with a mean HbA1C reduction of 2.72G
2.40% and the hepatic blood parameters normalized in all five patients.
Conclusions
Mauriac Syndrome is rare and not readily diagnosed by most clinicians. The
improvement of metabolic control seems to lead to hepatic enzymes normal-
ization in these patients, reinforcing the importance of early intervention.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP490
EP491
The incidence of sleep apnea in patients with type 1 diabetes
Ina Darashkevich1, Tatiana Mokhort2, Lola Nikanava1 &
Serhey Tishkovsky1
1Grodno State Medical University, Grodno, Belarus;2Belarussian State
Medical University, Minsk, Belarus.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
It is determined that sleep apnea itself can affect the level of HbA1c, thereby
affecting the compensation of carbohydrate metabolism in type 2 diabetes.
Objective
To determine the quantity and type of sleep apnea in diabetes type 1, depending
on the level of HbA1c.
Materials and methods
The study involved 50 people with type 1 diabetes without the presence of
diabetic autonomic neuropathy or diseases of the pulmonary system and ENT
with HbA1c levels of 6.2% vs 9.2%. Patients performed polysomnographic
monitoring-‘SOMNOlab2 (PSG) Polysomnography(R&K)’, daily monitoring of
blood glucose-‘CGMSGold’ by ‘MedtronikMINIMED’ (USA).
Results of the study
Group 1 (nZ20)    Group 2 (nZ30)
Indicator
mean (min-max)    mean (min-max)
HbA1c (%)
6.2
(5.0-7.5)*
9.2
(7.5-13.8)
The average value of glucose (AG)
8.1
(6.5-9.4)*
9.2
(3.2-16.6)
before going to bed (mmol/l)
The minimum value of blood glucose
4.9
(2.3-9.8)
5.5
(2.0-11.5)
during sleep (MGS) (mmol/l)
Obstructive sleep apnea (OA),
3.6
(0.16-12.0)*
1.6
(0.0-6.0)
total sleep time (TST) (number/h)
The maximum duration of OA (s)
81.8
(14.0-118.0)*
31.03
(0.0-111.0)
Central sleep apnea (CA) TST (number/h)
0.5
(0.0-4.7)*
2.7
(1.0-45.0)
The maximum duration of the CA (s)
19.7
(0.0-52.0)
12.6
(0.0-73.0)
Average SpO2 (%)
96.9
(94.7-98.0)
96.4
(94.1-98.2)
AHI TST
3.0
(0.2-17.4)*
1.37
(0.0-13.4)
AHI NREM
4.46
(0.0-17.4)*
1.38
(0.0-13.4)
*P!0.05.
Conclusions
OA and CA at type 1 diabetes are found mainly in the REM phase, S1 and S2
stages of sleep. Compensated type 1 diabetes occurs in OA 2.25 times more likely
to have a longer duration and which requires further analysis. It was determined
that the CA occurs for decompensated patients 5.4 times more often than in the
comparison group. This describes the violation of a central mechanism for the
regulation of respiration. Sleep apnea for examined patients was not accompanied
by a decrease in oxygen saturation, but the increase in AG bedtime and MGS
reduce blood oxygen saturation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP491
EP492
Usefulness of plasma glucose concentration to HbA1c ratio in predicting
clinical outcome during acute illness with extremely hyperglycemia
Yu-Wen Su1, Chien-Yi Hsu2 & Harn-Shen Chen1,2
1Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;2National Yang Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
Background
Stress induced hyperglycemia is common during acute illness and is related to
poorer clinical outcome.
Objective
To evaluate the correlation between plasma glucose elevation from baseline and
clinical outcome during acute illness.
Design
Retrospective,  observational  cohort  of  patients  presenting  to  emergency
department with plasma glucose concentration O500 mg/dl.
Participants
661 patients visiting the emergency department (ED) of Taipei veterans general
hospital between July 1, 2008 and September 30, 2010 with plasma glucose
O500 ml/dl were enrolled.
Measurements
Systolic blood pressure, heart rate, plasma glucose, white blood cell, neutrophil
count, hematocrit, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, liver function test,
plasma glucose concentration were collected at initial presentation to emergency
department. HbA1c data within 6 months was reviewed from our hospital
database. GAR derives from plasma glucose divided by HbA1c.
Results
GAR of the deceased is substantially higher than survived (81.0G25.9 vs 67.6G
25.0, P!0.001). There is a trend toward increased 90-day mortality in groups
with higher GAR (Log-Rank test for trend P!0.0001). In multivariable Cox
regression analysis, GAR is significantly related to 90-day mortality (Hazard ratio
[HR] per 1-S.D. increase: 1.41, 95% CI: 1.22-1.63, P!0.001), but not plasma
glucose (HR per 1- S.D. increase: 0.89, 95% CI: 0.70-1.13, PZ0.328). Rate of
intensive care unit (ICU) admission and mechanical ventilator use also elevated
in higher GAR groups in a graded manner (Linear trend P!0.001 for ICU
admission, linear trend PZ0.026 for mechanical ventilator use).
Limitation
Randomization study design is not feasible.
Conclusion
GAR independently predicts 90-day mortality, intensive care unit admission, and
frequency of mechanical ventilator requirement. It is a better predictor for patient
outcome compared to plasma glucose in subjects with extremely high glucose.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP492
EP493
The influence of glycemic control on bone mineral density and bone
metabolism in patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Eleftheria Barmpa1, Spyros Karamagiolis2, Stelios Tigas3,
Parthena Navrozidou4, Marianna Vlychou4, Ioannis Fezoulidis4,
Georgios N Koukoulis1 & Alexandra Bargiota1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, University of
Thessaly, Larissa, Greece;2General Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece;
3Department of Endocrinology, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece;
4Department of Radiology, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
Introduction
Although patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) have normal or higher
bone mineral density (BMD) comparing to healthy subjects, they appear to be at
high risk of osteoporotic fractures. Factors that contribute to bone fragility in
T2DM are not clearly understood. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
influence of glycemic control on bones in T2DM.
Methods/design
We studied 40 patients with T2DM (mean age: 54.3C3.2 years, M/F: 24/16) at
baseline and after 1-year follow-up (FU). We measured HbA1c, lumbar spine
(LS) and femoral neck (FN) BMD by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA).
Bone resorption was assessed by b-crosslaps and bone formation was assessed by
serum levels of type 1 procollagen total N-terminal propeptide (TP1NP). Patients
who were on thiazolidinediones and insulin treatment were excluded from the
study and these with renal or chronic disease, as well. Based on the current
literature BMD changes at LS more than 3% and at FN more than 6% are
considered to be significant.
Results
Mean duration of DM was 6.1C1.9 years. At FU, there were no significant
changes at BMI (kg/m2) (27.8C3.4 vs 27.1C3.2, PZ0.09) but significant
changes were observed in mean HbA1c (7.7C0.6% vs 6.8C0.3%, PZ0.034).
BMD (g/cm2) at LS and FN was similar at baseline and at FU (LS: 1.074G0.104
vs 1.071G0.113. PZ0.067) (FN: 0.897G0.121 vs 0.893G0.111, PZ0.072). At
FU, TP1NP and b-crosslaps had a significant decrease in parallel with HbA1c
levels (TP1NP: 46.6C5.3 vs 41.1C2.3 PZ0.045 and b-crosslaps: 371.9C10.8
vs 364C6.8 PZ0.047).
Conclusion
Effective management with improvement of hyperglycemia in patients with
T2DM appears to have a positive contribution on bone turnover. More patients
though are needed to be studied to confirm this result.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP493
EP494
Relation of mean platelet volume with serum paraoxonase-1 activity
and brachial artery diameter and intima media thickness in diabetic
patients with respect to obesity and diabetic complications
Pinar Karakaya
Department of Endocrinology, Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Training and
Research Hospital,, Istanbul, Turkey.
Objective
To evaluate the relation of mean platelet volume (MPV) levels with serum
paraoxonase-1 activity and brachial artery diameter and intima media thickness in
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
diabetic patients with respect to obesity and diabetic complications.
Methods
A total of 201 diabetic patients grouped with respect to obesity (obese (nZ89)
and non-obese (nZ112) and diabetic complications (with (nZ50) or without
(nZ150) microvascular complications and with (nZ91) or without (nZ108)
macrovascular complications) groups were included. Data on demographic and
lifestyle  characteristics  of  patients,  anthropometric  measurements,  diabetes
related microvascular and macrovascular complications, serum levels for MPV,
brachial  artery  diameter  and  intima  media  thickness
(IMT)  and  serum
paraoxonase and arylesterase activities were recorded. Correlation of MPV
values to paraoxonase and arylesterase activities as well as to brachial artery
diameter and IMT was evaluated in study groups.
Results
Mean (S.D.) paraoxonase and arylesterase values were 119.8 (37.5) U/l and 149.0
(39.9) U/l, respectively in the overall population, with no significant difference
with  respect  to  obesity  and  macrovascular  diabetic  complications,  whereas
significantly lower values for paraoxonase (107.5 (30.7) vs 123.9 (38.8) U/l,
PZ0.007) and arylesterase (132.1 (30.2) vs 154.7 (41.2) U/l, PZ0.001) were
noted in patients with than without diabetic microvascular complications.
Mean (S.D.) MPV values were 9.10 (0.87) fl in the overall population, with no
significant difference with respect to obesity and diabetic complications. No
significant correlation of MPV values to paraoxonase and arylesterase activities
and to brachial artery diameter and IMT was noted in the overall study population
as well as in study groups.
Conclusion
In conclusion, our findings revealed a significant decrease I PON-1 activity in
diabetic patients with microvascular rather than macrovascular complications,
whereas  regardless  of  obesity  and  diabetic  complications,  no  increase  in
thrombogenic activity and no relation of thrombogenic activity with PON-1
activity and brachial artery diameter and IMK.
Keywords: Mean platelet volume, paraoxonase, arylesterase, diabetes mellitus,
obesity,  microvascular  complications,  macrovascular  complications,  brachial
artery, intima media thickness, atherosclerosis
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP494
EP495
Antibiotic susceptibilities of Gram-negative bacteria as infectious
agents isolated from community-acquired urinary tract infections in
diabetic and non-diabetic patients
Kader Ugur1, Affan Denk2, Selcuk Yusuf Sener1, Isa Ahmet Bal2,
Ayse Sagmak Tartar2, Bedrettin Orhan3, Emir Donder3 & Yusuf Ozkan1
1Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, School of Medicine, Firat
University, Elazig, Turkey;2Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical
Microbiology, School of Medicine, Firat University, Elazig, Turkey;
3Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Firat University,
Elazig, Turkey.
Introduction
Diabetes  mellitus  is  a  metabolic  disease  which  causes  acute  and  chronic
complications  including  insulin  deficiency  and  ineffectiveness  or  both  its
incidence is increasing every day. Urinary tract infections are more frequently
seen and can lead a more aggressive course in diabetic patients when compared
with the population in general. The aim of this study is to determine antibacterial
susceptibilities of Gram-negative bacteria isolated from diabetic and non-diabetic
patients as infectious agents of community-acquired urinary tract infections and
to compare their rates of resistance to the antibiotics frequently used in empirical
treatment.
Material and methods
Ninety-six  diabetic  and
68
non-diabetic  patients  whose  urine  cultures
demonstrated  Gram-negative  bacteria  were  included  in  the  study.  For
microbiological  examination  urine  samples  were  seeded  on  culture  media
containing 5% sheep blood agar and eosin-methylene blue agar and incubated at
378C for 24 h. Gram-negative bacteria grown at a concentration of O105 cfu/ml
were identified using Vitek 2 automated system. Antibiotic susceptibilities of the
isolated bacteria were again determined using Vitek 2 automated system and the
results were evaluated as sensitive and resistant.
Results
Urinary system infections were more frequently seen in women. In both diabetic
and non-diabetic patient groups, most frequently Escherichia coli (88.5% in
diabetic  and
85.3%  in  non-diabetic  groups)  were  isolated.  According  to
antibacterial  susceptibilities  of  isolated  microorganisms,  the  most  effective
antibiotics  in  both  groups  were  carbapenems,  nitrofurantoin,  amikacin  and
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
piperacillin-tazobactam. In the diabetic group, microorganisms mostly demon-
strated  the  highest  rates  of  resistance  against  ampicillin,  cephalosporins,
ciprofloxacin,  amoxicillin-clavulanic  acid  and  in  the  non-diabetic  group
ampicillin,  amoxicillin-clavulanic  acid,  cefuroxime  and  trimethoprim-sulfa-
methoxazole.
Conclusion
Resistance to ciprofloxacin which is used frequently in the empirical treatment of
community-acquired urinary system infections was at a significantly higher rate
in the diabetic group. In diabetic patients, it will be more appropriate to give
antibiotherapy  in  urinary  system  infections  based  on  the  antibacterial
susceptibility test results.
Keywords: Diabetes mellitus, urinary tract infection, antibiotic, susceptibility
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP495
EP496
Diabetes and cognitive impairment
Gulin Alkan1, Seher Tanrikulu2, Cemile Idiz2, Birsu Beser4,
Sukriye Akca Kalem4, Ilhan Satman2, Sibel Cakir3 & Nevin Dinccag2
1Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Internal Medicine, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey;2Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey;3Istanbul Faculty of
Medicine, Division of Psychiatry Mood Disorders Unit, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey;4Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Psychologist, Division of
Behavioural Neurology, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Diabetic patients have an increased risk of developing dementia and cognitive
impairments.  DM  related  factors  such  as  macrovascular  and  microvascular
complications, glucose toxicity, hyperinsulinemia have been suggested to be
involved cognitive impairment even in prediabetic stage. Our aim is to establish
the relationship between insulin resistance and cognitive impairment and the
effect of poorly controlled diabetes on cognitive impairment.
Research design and methods
Twenty prediabetic patients who were evaluated using a standard OGTT, 40
patients with T2DM and twenty non-diabetic healthy controls aged between 40
and 65 were included in this study. Forty patient with T2DM divided into two
groups; well- controlled (A1c!7.5) and poorly controlled (A1cO 7.5) based on
their HbA1c. All factors that might affect cognitive function excluded from the
study. We assesed neuropsychological profile of these groups and compared with
twenty non-diabetic, healthy controls. All patients and healthy controls matched
for sex ratio and level of education. Attention & working memory, psychomotor
speed, verbal memory, visuospatial memory and executive function were tested.
Results
Statistically significant differences between the patients with poorly controlled
diabetes mellitus in Verbal Memory Process Test (P value ! 0.05). In Trail
Making Test part B diabetic patients showed significantly lower performances
than prediabetics and controls. And in Wisconsin Card Sorting Test perseveration
all three patients groups performed significantly worse (P value ! 0.05) than
controls.
Conclusion
T2DM  causes early brain  ageing and declines  cognitive functions  even in
prediabetic stage. Chronic hyperglycemia and vascular complications in poorly
controlled T2DM worsen cognitive impairments.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP496
EP497
Cystatin C and renal function in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Volha Vasilkova1,3, Tatiana Mokhort2 & Kulyash Zekenova3
1Gomel State Medical University, Gomel, Belarus;2Belarusian State
Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;3The Republican Research Center for
Radiation Medicine and Human Ecology, Gomel, Belarus.
Background
Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a serious complication of diabetes associated with
increased  risk  of  mortality,  cardiovascular  and  renal  outcomes.  Diagnostic
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
markers to detect DN at early stage are important as early intervention can slow
loss of kidney function and improve patient outcomes. The aim of our study was
to evaluate the role of serum cystatin C (CysC) for early detection of kidney
damages in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DT2).
Materials and methods
The renal function of the diabetic patients was evaluated using the albumin-
creatinine ratio (ACR) and Kidney Disease Outcome Quality Initiative-Kidney
Disease Improving Global Outcomes (K/DOQI-KDIGO) classification. Serum
CysC and HbA1c were also measured in 84 diabetic and 36 healthy subjects.
Results
Serum CysC was significantly higher (1.3G0.9 mg/l) in diabetic patients with
eGFR !60 ml/min than control subjects (0.8G0.2 mg/l), P!0.05. A significant
correlation between CysC and eGFR (rZK0.26, P!0.05) was observed. CysC
levels significantly increased with increasing CKD stage 1 to 3 and from normo-
to microalbuminuria and showed a positive correlation with ACR (rZ0.32,
PZ0.004). In a comparison of renal function markers in type 2 diabetic patients
according to serum CysC level, all markers including ACR, serum creatinine,
and eGFR showed significant differences between patients with CysC level
!1.1 mg/l and those with CysC R1.1 mg/l.
Conclusion
According to our results, serum CysC is a useful marker for screening of DN in
patients with DT2 because it reflects both a decrease in GFR and elevated ACR.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP497
EP498
Markers of endothelial and autonomic dysfunction in early stages of
glucose intolerance and in metabolic syndrome
Rumyana Dimova1, Tsvetalina Tankova1, Georgi Kirilov2,
Nevena Chakarova1, Lilia Dakovska1 & Greta Grozeva1
1Department of Diabetology, Clinical Centre of Endocrinology,
Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria;2Department of Radioimmunology,
Clinical Centre of Endocrinology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Aim
The aim of the study was to evaluate sE-selectin and Endothelin-1 as markers of
endothelial function and autonomic tone at early stages of impaired glucose
tolerance and in metabolic syndrome (MetS).
Material and methods
A total of 87 subjects - 48 females and 39 males (mean age 45.7G11.6 years,
mean BMI 31.4G6.6 kg/m2), divided into three groups according to glucose
tolerance: 35 with normal glucose tolerance (NGT), 35 with prediabetes and 17
with newly-diagnosed type 2 diabetes (NDT2D), and into two groups according to
the presence of MetS: 66 with MetS and 21 without MetS, were enrolled. Glucose
tolerance was studied during OGTT. Anthropometric indices, blood pressure,
HbA1c and serum lipids were measured. Serum sE-selectin and Endothelin-1
were estimated using ELISA tests. Autonomic function was assessed by ANX-3.0
using frequency-domain analysis at rest and during deep breathing, Valsalva,
standing.
Results
The prevalence of cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction was 5.7% in NGT, 8.6%
in prediabetes, 23.5% in NDT2D. No significant difference was observed in
sE-selectin and Endothelin-1 between the groups according to glucose tolerance
and in endothelial markers and autonomic parameters according to MetS. Our
results  showed  significantly  diminished  parasympathetic  activity  at  rest
(PZ0.005,  PZ0.016,  respectively)  and  during  deep  breathing
(PZ0.043,
PZ0.046, respectively) in NDT2D as compared to prediabetes and NGT; and
elevated  heart  rate  at  rest  in  NDT2D  in  comparison  to  NGT
(PZ0.024).
sE-selectin correlated with fasting plasma glucose (rZ0.211, PZ0.050) and heart
rate at rest (rZ0.214, PZ0.047). There was negative correlation between both
sympathetic and parasympathetic power and age, HbA1c, waist, BMI, total and
LDL-cholesterol.
Conclusion
Our results demonstrate that slight increase in plasma glucose and the presence of
MetS do not influence sE-selectin and Endothelin-1 concentrations. Autonomic
tone is affected at early stages of impaired glucose homeostasis, the main
determinants being age, long-term glycemic control, obesity, total and LDL-
cholesterol.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP498
EP499
Androgenic state in patients with diabetes mellitus type 1 and diabetic
nephropathy
Elena Vaschenko1 & Tatjana Mokhort2
1The Republican Research Centre for Radiation Medicine and Human
Ecology, Gomel, Belarus;2Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk,
Belarus.
Objective
To analyze correlation between the duration of diabetes mellitus (DM), renal
function and androgenic state indicators in patients with DM type 1.
One hundred and sixty three males with DM 1 type in the age of 18-55 years
(39.75G9.69) with the duration of disease more than 1 year were examined. The
control group included 25 almost healthy males in the age 21-41 years (34.60G
7.80). The compensation of DM was estimated by the level of glycosylated
hemoglobin (HbA1c). Also, the indicators of lipid profile (total cholesterol,
triglycerides),  glomerular  filtration  rate
(GFR)  MDRD,  total  testosterone,
luteinizing  hormone/follicle-stimulating  hormone
(LH/FSH),  prolactin,  sex
hormone-binding globulin, homocysteine. The statistical analysis was conducted
with the use of SPSS 17.0.
It was defined that there was the decrease of GFR according to the formula
MDRD in the terms of the increase of diabetes duration: in the group with GFR !
60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 the duration of the diabetes was 23.72 years (G8.04), in
the group with GFR O60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 it was 12.15 years (G8.37) (P!
0.05). In the terms of the decrease of GFR the increase of correlation FSH/LH was
defined: in the group with GFR !60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 the correlation LH/FSH
was 1.82 (G0.63), in the group with GFR O60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 it was 1.37
(G1.26) (!0.005); the decrease of the total testosterone: in the group with GFR
!60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 the total testosterone was 9.90 nmol/l (G3.10), in the
group with GFR O60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 it was 10.61 nmol/l (G8.76) (P!0.05);
the  decrease  of  the  homocysteine  level  was  noticed:
11.42G2.70 mcmol/l
comparing with the 10.32G4.92 mcmol/l in the group with GFR O60 ml/min per
1.73 m2  (PZ0.006). We have not revealed any differences in the level of
prolactin, sex hormone-binding globulin. The revealed changes are important risk
factors for development and progression of vascular complications and require
appropriate arrangements.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP499
EP500
Audit of management of cystic fibrosis related diabetes mellitus in
Nottingham University Hospital
Seifeldin Yahia, Kok Kee Liew, Pramya Mahendra, Adrian Paszkiewicz,
Tun Win HLA, William Kalk, Andy Clayton & Jane Dewar
Nottingham University Hospital, Nottingham City Campus, Nottingham,
UK.
Introduction
Patients with Cystic fibrosis are now living longer due to advances in nutritional
and medical care. As a consequence a larger number are developing related
co-morbidities such as cystic fibrosis related diabetes (CFRD). CFRD is the
most common co-morbidity in CF, with the prevalence being up to 50% by the
age of 30.
Aims
To assess current practice in relation to the UK CF Trust guidelines 2004 -
Screening for CFRD should begin at age 12 using OGTT. Patients should be
treated with insulin and reviewed quarterly by MDT specialising in CFRD.
HbA1C should be measured quarterly to guide further therapy. Annual screening
for complications should occur in all patients older than 12 years.
Methods
Retrospective case notes and hospital database review of adults with CFRD at
Nottingham University Hospital between the years 1998 and 2014. Also data was
collected about changes to weight and lung functions following 1-2 years of
insulin therapy.
Results
Seventy two patients were identified (40 males, 32 females). Mean age: 30 (range
18-62). In 83.3% of patients CFRD was diagnosed with OGTT and patients were
treated with various insulin regimens. 61% of patients were seen quarterly.
HbA1C was measured quarterly in 41.7%. Blood pressure, retinopathy, Foot,
ACR, CVS events and lipid profile were screened annually in 47.2, 40, 25, 4.2 and
45.8% respectively. Weight after 1-2 years on insulin was static in
9.5%,
increased in 44.4%, decreased in 46%, whereas, lung function was stable in 3.2%,
increased in 38%, decreased in 58.7%.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Overall, most of our patients were diagnosed with OGTT and treated with insulin.
However, our performance is average in terms of follow up, monitoring and
screening for complications. These discrepancies could partially be explained by
the fact that data was collected from 1998, but the guidelines were only issued in
2004. Also paediatric databases and notes were not used. Another issue with
monitoring is the large number of DNAs. Nonetheless, there is likely room for
improvement in these areas.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP500
EP501
Observational and retrospective study to analyze the changes in lipid
and glycemic profiles in patients with metabolic syndrome after
treatment with statins: ESMET study
Francisco Javier del Can˜ izo-Gomez1 & Rosario Guinea-Lopez2
1Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor, Madrid, Spain;2Departamento
Medico Casen Recordati, Madrid, Spain.
The diabetogenic risk associated with statin therapy is higher in patients with
pre-existing risk factors, such as metabolic syndrome (MS).
Objective
To assess changes in lipid and glycemic profile in dyslipidemic subjects with MS
after statin therapy.
Methods
Observational, retrospective, multi-center study, conducted in 40 endocrinology
Spanish hospitals. Each endocrinologist included the first 10 patients O18 years
with MS, HDL-C!40 mg/dl in men and !50 mg/dl in women and two or more
MS risk factors according to NCEP-ATP III criteria, treated with statins for at
least
12
weeks  before  their  inclusion,  and  had  signed  informed  consent.
Demographic variables, medical history, diabetic complications, anthropometric
data and analytical and therapeutic profiles were collected before and after
starting statin therapy. ADA objectives for lipid and glycemic control, student
t test for paired data or the Wilcoxon sign tests for quantitative variables,
and McNemar test or Fisher’s exact test for qualitative variables were used.
A P!0.05 was significant.
Results
A total of 388 patients were enrolled, of them 345 were evaluated; 53.9% were
men,  age  was
60.9G9.3
years,
89.9%  had  abdominal  obesity,
88.7%
hypertension, 88.4% fasting glucose (FG)R110 mg/dl, 77.7% triglycerides(TGs)
R150 mg/dl and 100% HDL-C!40 mg/dl in men and !50 mg/dl in women.
After statin therapy, there was a decrease in total cholesterol, TGs, LDL-C,
HbA1C and FG, and an increase in HDL-C and in the percentage of patients
achieving the ADA objectives (P!0.001 for all). Multivariate analysis showed a
greater  increase  of  HDL-C  with  pitavastatin
18.4%  (vs  atorvastatin
7.4%;
PZ0.0094, and vs simvastatin 9.6%; P!0.0001), and univariate analysis a
reduction on the percentage of change on FG (4.8G20.5%; P!0.0161) after
treatment with pitavastatin
Conclusion
In the MS patients studied, glucidic and lipid parameters and the percentage of
patients achieving the ADA objectives improved after statin therapy. Pitavastatin
could have better cardiovascular benefit due to the greater increase in HDL-C.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP501
EP502
Assessment of dermatological conditions in diabetic patients,
associations with demographic values and metabolic compensation
Ksenija Kramica1 & Ieva Ruza2
1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia;2Riga Eastern Clinical University
Hospital Clinic ‘Gailezers’, Riga, Latvia.
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus
(DM) is a group of metabolic diseases where prolonged
hyperglycemia provoke damaging impact on internal organs and the skin as well.
Comprehension of dermatological changes in DM, association with demographic
values, metabolic compensation level (HbA1C) could help to define groups where
skin complications may develop more often. That could be a useful criteria to
diagnose DM earlier.
Aim
To determine prevalence of skin pathological conditions in DM, to find out their
association with demographic values, compensation level.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Material and methods
A retrospective cohort study was performed. Participants were included from
Internal Medicine Clinic of Riga Eastern Clinical University Hospital. Patient
interviewing, observation and retrospective analysis of case files were performed.
Results
A total of 151 patients were included - 70 (46%) men and 81 (54%) women; the
mean age was 59.9 years (S.D. 15.9 years). Patients were divided into 3 age
groups - group I (%45 years) 19%, group II (46-59 years) 25%, group III (R60
years) 56%; into groups by DM duration, type and therapy - (0-5 years) 27%,
(6-10 years) 23%, (11-20 years) 34%, (O20 years) 16%; Type 1DM 19%, Type
2DM 75%, other  (secondary) 6%;with  insulin  therapy  (60%), with  peroral
therapy, diet (40%). 4 most frequent skin conditions were identified - atrophy
(75%), dryness (70%), onychomycosis (59%), necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum
(42%). Prevalences of skin conditions were found statistically significant: atrophy
in III age group 86% (PZ0.001); dryness with disease duration 80% (PZ0.043),
in women 78% (PZ0.02); onychomycosis in III age group 74% (PZ0.001), in
patients with Type 2DM 67% (PZ0.004); necrobiosis in patients with insulin
therapy 49% (PZ0.03), in II-III age groups 48% (PZ0.012).
Conclusion
Most common dermatological conditions in DM patients are atrophy, dryness,
onychomycosis,  necrobiosis  lipoidica,  hypohidrosis.  Associations  with  age,
gender, treatment, disease duration, type were defined. There was no statistical
significance found with compensation level.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP502
EP503
Investigational study of the impact of diabetes on cognitive function
Athanasios Mousiolis1, Kyriakos Kazakos2, Maria Giavropoulou1,
Mara Gioka2 & Kalliopi Kotsa1
1Division of Endocrinology, AHEPA Hospital, Aristotle University,
Thessaloniki, Greece;2Department of Nursing, Alecander Technological
Educational Institute, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Introduction
Modern research studies reveal a negative impact of diabetes on cognitive
function. Nonetheless, little is known about the risk factors that are involved in
this disturbance. The present study aimed to examine the associations among
cognitive/emotional functions and a number of metabolic factors associated with
diabetes, in order to identify a possible link between cognitive decline and
diabetes.
Materials and methods
One  hundred  thirty  five  people
(nZ135)  from  the  region  of  Thessaloniki
participated in the study. The sample consisted of patients from the outpatient
diabetes clinic (First department of internal medicine AHEPA Hospital) and the
local center of Alzheimer and Dementia. Two groups (diabetics and control) were
investigated in this cross-sectional study. Only subjects with mild cognitive
impairment or mild dementia were recruited in this study with those suffering
from heavy dementia being excluded. A wide range of metabolic factors were
investigated as well as cognitive function assessment using cognitive screening
tests.
Results
In the group of diabetic patients a significant greater cognitive impairment,
assessed with MOCA test, was revealed. Cognitive function was not associated
with the duration of diabetes and metabolic deregulation, as assessed by HbA1c.
A significant mild positive correlation between total cholesterol and triglycerides
with cognitive function was found in the group of diabetic patients. A similar
correlation between HDL and ADCS-ADL was present in the group of non
diabetic patients. A mild positive correlation between waist circumference and
cognitive function (ADCS-ADL test) was found in the group of diabetic patients.
Peripheral  neuropathy  showed  strong  negative  correlation  with  cognitive
function.
Conclusion
It seems that metabolic abnormalities that accompany diabetes mellitus may
provide a great amount of risk factors responsible for mild cognitive impairment
and dementia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP503
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP504
Abstract withdrawn.
EP505
Left ventricular hypertrophy and diabetic nephropathy; factors that
influencing this relationship
Ergita Nelaj, Margarita Gjata, Edite Sadiku & Mihal Tase
University Hospital Center, Tirana, Albania.
Introduction
The prevalence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is high among patients with
chronic kidney disease (CKD) and associated with a lower cardiac functional
status, particularly in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM). The aim of the study
was  to  estimate  prevalence  of  LVH  and  to  define  factors  influencing  to
development of LVH in patients with diabetic nephropathy (DN).
Methods
patients with type
2 DM were studied - 22 males, 43 females, mean age
53.717.4.21 patients had normal renal function with mean hemoglobin (Hb)
13.72.0 g/dl, 44 patients had chronic renal failure (CRF) with decreased mean
GFR 46.723.7 ml/min/1.73 m2/ and Hb 11.82.4 g/dl (P!0.05). Glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) was calculated using the Cockcroft-Gault formula. Anemia
was defined as hemoglobin (Hb) ! 13 g/dl in men and ! 12 g/dl for women by
the definition of WHO. 62 patients had arterial hypertension. Patients on dialysis
were not included.
Results
LVH (left ventricular mass index (LVMI) O 134 g/m2 for men and O 110 g/m2 for
women) was found in 50 DN patients (77.6%). At GFR ! 30 ml/min/1.73 m2 the
prevalence of LVH was 100%. Concentric hypertrophy of left ventricular (LV) was
found in 51% patients, eccentric LV hypertrophy in 26.5% patients, 14.3% patients
had concentric remodeling of LV, 8.2% - were with normal geometry of LV. The
LVMI is significantly associated with older age (RZ0.43, P!0.01), Hb (RZK0.44,
P!0.05), GFR (RZK0.29, P!0.05). Independent factors affecting on develop-
ment of LVH in patients with DN by multiple logistic regression analysis were Hb
level and value of systolic blood pressure (PZ0.0003).
Conclusions
We conclude that prevalence of LVH was higher in patients with type 2 diabetes,
with impaired renal function. Anemia and systolic blood pressure were independent
factors influencing on development of LVH in patients with DN.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP505
EP506
Estimation of the frequency of nighttime hypoglycemic reaction cases in
diabetes maelicus of the Type 1
Elena Makhlina1, Tatyana Mokhort2, Yana Navmenova1 &
Irina Savasteeva1
1SI Republican Research Centre for Radiation Medicine and Human
Ecology, Gomel, Belarus;2Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk,
Belarus.
Objective
To estimate the frequency of night time hypoglycemic reaction cases in daily
monitoring of the glucose in interstitial fluid under the conditions of DM 1.
Materials and methods
The  study  of  daily  glucose  dynamics  was  conducted  with  the  use  of  the
continuous  glucose  monitoring  system  made  by  the  company  Medtronik
Minimed, USA. The study included 113 patients with DM 1. Patients ware
divided into 2 groups: group 1 with hypoglycemic reaction cases (nZ50), and
group 2 without hypoglycemic reaction cases (nZ63).
Results
The age of the patients in the group 1 was 29.49 (24.05; 36.18) years, in the group
2 it was 27.83 (21.13; 34.94) years (PO0.05). The period of the DM 1 in the
group 1 was 9.07 (4.23;13.53), in the group 2 it was 7.18 (2.78; 13.62) years (PO
0.05). The level of HbA1c in the group 1 was 8.20 (7.30; 9.40) %, in the group 2 it
was 9.70 (8.40; 11.20] %, (P!0.001). BMI in the group 1 was 23.66 (21.97;
25.82) kg/m2, in the group 2 it was 23.42 (21.45; 27.34) kg/m2 (PO0.05). The
daily dose of insulin in the group 1 was 0.72 (0.60; 0.87) IU/kg, in the group 2 it
was 0.72 (0.56; 0.98) IU/kg (PO0.05). The frequency of night hypoglycemic
reaction cases in the group 1 was 15% in males and 28% in females (PO0.05).
Between 23:00 and 03:00 the level of glucose in interstitial fluid in the group 1
was 7.80 (5.50; 10.60) mmol/l, it was 10.50 (8.80; 13.40) mmol/l, (P!0.001) in
the group 2. Between 03:00 and 06:00 the level of glucose in interstitial fluid
in group 1 was 8.20 (6.10; 11.10) mmol/l, it was 10.80 (8.70; 13.30) mmol/l
(P!0.001) in the group 2.
Conclusion
1. The frequency of nighttime hypoglycemic reaction cases doesn’t depend on
sex, age, period of DM 1, daily dose of injected insulin.
2. The risk of night hypoglycemic reactions is higher in patients with the lower
risk index of hypoglycemia that coincides with the minimum value of glycaemia
at night and glycosylated hemoglobin.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP506
EP507
The diabetic hand: a forgotten complication
Mohamed Samir Merad1, Zakaria Benziane1, Fatiha Mohammedi1 &
Amina Benouis2
1Service d’endocrinologie-diabétologie Clinique Lariberre Chu du Dr
Benzerdjeb, Oran, Algeria;2Laboratoire de Biologie du développement et
de la différenciation, Faculté des sciences, Université d’Oran, Oran, Algeria.
Background and aims
The diabetic hand infection is less reported in the literature. Therefore, it is easily
ignored and underestimated resulting in increased morbidity among the diabetic
population. The aim is to determine the clinical and therapeutic characteristics in
our hospitalized patients.
Materials and methods
All  hand  infection  patients  admitted  to  the  Department  of  Diabetes  and
Endocrinology at Oran University Hospital center during 10 years were reviewed
retrospectively. A hand infection was defined as any Infection of the upper
extremity  in  hospitalized  diabetic  patients.  Thirty  three  patients  with  hand
infection  were  found.  Their  etiology  identified  from  clinical  history  and
examination, number of operations and management, hospital stay and out-
come-like amputation were recorded. Data collected were entered into a computer
database using IBM SPSS Statistics 20 and analyzed using the same application.
Results
The mean age of the patients was 54G2.44 years (range 23-76 years). 21 patients
(64%) were male and 12 (36%) were female. Male to female ratio was 1, 75:1
(dominantly males). All male patients were manual workers (Carpenter, Farmers
and Blacksmith), female were also having active life (Housewives). The mean
duration of diabetes before presentation was 10.6G7.2 years; three of the patients
were  newly  diagnosed  at  presentation.  The  lesions  consisted  of  cellulitis,
phlegmon or ulceration of the finger, hand, and arm. During the course of
treatment, seven patients (21.2%) required amputation of one or more digits of the
dominant hand. But no patient required amputation of forearm, arm or hand.
Conclusion
Diabetic hand involves persons in active life period relatively in younger age
group. Undiagnosed or uncontrolled diabetes is major contributory factor. Health
Education, early diagnosis & prompt treatment in specialized units may be
helpful.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP507
EP508
Improvement of specialised help to patient with diabetic foot syndrome
in Uzbekistan
Nilufar Ibragimova1, Telman Kamalov2, Hamidulla Shakirov2,
Lyudmila Kokareva1 & Oxana Platonova1
1Charity Union of Persons with Disabilities and People with Diabetes
‘UMID’, Tashkent, Uzbekistan;2Republican Specialised Center of
Endocrinology, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Goal
Decrease  a  number  of  lower  limb  amputations  in  PDM  in  Uzbekistan  by
improvement of specialised help given to patients with DFS.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Materials and methods
Prior to 2010 there were only 2 ‘Diabetic foot’ rooms in Tashkent, Uzbekistan. In
2010-2012, ‘UMID’ association jointly with Uzbekistan Ministry of Health and
Research Centre for Endocrinology implemented a project ‘Prevention of lower
limb amputations in people with diabetes mellitus in Uzbekistan’ granted by the
World Diabetes Fund (WDF).
Results
Within the framework of the project for the first time in Uzbekistan, 288 ‘Diabetic
foot’ rooms were set up under 14 endocrinological dispensaries and in 274 rural
district clinics which were also equipped with a medical armchair for feet
examination, a tuning fork, monofilament, percussion hammer, kit of dressing
materials. To work in these rooms, 615 podiatrists were trained who render a
qualified medical help to PDM and teach them rules of foot care. Annually over
28 800 PDM undertake feet examination and training in these rooms. A 2-fold
decrease in a number of amputations and increased awareness of PDM in foot care
proves  improvement  of  specialised  help  to  people  with  DFS.  Within  the
framework of the project, 288 multidisciplinary teams (surgeon C endocrinol-
ogist C podiatrist) were trained throughout the country and now they render a
specialised help to patients with DFS.
Conclusions
Implementation of the project ‘Prevention of lower limb amputations in people
with diabetes mellitus in Uzbekistan’ improved a specialised help to people with
DFS due to launching a network of ‘Diabetic foot’ rooms and an effective work of
podiatrists and multidisciplinary teams trained on sites and that lowered a number
of amputations in PDM by 2 times; increased awareness of people with diabetes
on prevention of DFS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP508
EP509
Risk factors for fetal macrosomia in gestational diabetes
Zivile Bukelskiene1, Gintare Naskauskiene1 & Zydrune Visockiene1,2
1Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania;
2Vilnius University Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Background
A fetal macrosomia is the most frequent complication of gestational diabetes
mellitus (GDM) in Lithuania. The aim of our study was to assess the predicting
factors of fetal macrosomia in GDM.
Methods
Retrospective data analysis of 3 547 women who delivered in Vilnius University
Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos in 2015 was performed. Documented GDM risk
factors were obtained from medical records and electronic database. Newborns
over 4000 g birth weight were defined as macrosomic cases. Comparisons were
made between women who delivered healthy (group I) and macrosomic (group II)
newborns. Multiple regression analysis was used to calculate the odds ratio (OR)
and their 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Results
Two hundred and thirteen women (6%) out of 3547 had GDM. Fifty of them
(24.39%) delivered macrosomic newborns. There were no age difference between
the groups (31.7 vs 32.1 kg), but women had higher pre-pregnancy body weight
(78.3 vs 67.0 kg, P!0002) and BMI (29.1 vs 25.7, P!0.004) and GDM was
diagnosed later (31.0 vs 29.7 week, P!0.048) in group I compared to group II.
Factors  associated  with  increased  risk  of fetal  macrosomia  were  maternal
pre-pregnancy BMI (OR1.11 [1.0-1.2], P!0.05), previous fetal macrosomia (OR
8.04
[3.5K18.4],  P!0.05),  previous  polyhydramnion  (OR  4.04  [1.3-12.7],
P!0.05), time of GDM diagnosis (OR 1.11 [1.0-1.2], P!0.05), and gestational
age (OR 1.35 [1.0-1.8], P!0.05). In a multiple regression pre-pregnancy body
weight and previous fetal macrosomia remained the only predictors for increased
risk of neonatal macrosomia.
Conclusions
Neonatal macrosomia prevention remains a challenge. According to our study
pre-pregnancy body weight and previous fetal macrosomia are associated with
increased risk of fetal macrosomia of current pregnancy. This finding provides
insights for the prevention of macrosomia development in women with GDM.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP509
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP510
Stroke recurrence (but not mortality) is higher among diabetic and
prediabetic patients
Julia Silva-Fernández1, Rafael García-Ruiz2, Rosa M García-Ruiz3,
M Carmen Blanco-Valero4 & Carolina González-Pereira5
1Endocrinology Department. La Mancha Centro Hospital, Alcázar de San
Juan (Ciudad Real), Spain;2Neurology Department, La Mancha Centro
Hospital, Alcázar de San Juan (Ciudad Real), Spain;3Internal Medicine
Nursery, Denia Hospital, Denia (Alicante), Spain;4Neurology Department,
Neuroclínica Berenguer, Badajoz, Spain;5Intensive Care Unit, Central de
Asturias Hospital, Oviedo (Asturias), Spain.
Introduction
Diabetes Mellitus (DM) and prediabetic states (pre-DM) are well known risk
factors for stroke. Admission blood glucose level and its control during hospital
stay, help predicting arterial recanalization after thrombolysis and middle and
long  term  prognosis.  We  analysed  recurrence,  mortality and nosocomial
infectious  complications  in  DM,  pre-DM  and  patients  without  previous  or
newly diagnosed DM or pre-DM.
Methods
Descriptive analysis in consecutive patients with a diagnosis of stroke or transient
ischemic attack (TIA) in our centre from 15th November 2013 to 14th may 2014.
Descriptive and bivariate analysis were made.
Results
One hundred and sixty one patients were included - 66 DM (41%), 32 pre-DM
(19.9%) and 63 normoglycemic (NG) patients (39.1%). Stroke etiology was
cardioembolic in 42 (26.09%) patients (NG 30.16%, DM C pre-DM 23.47%; ns)
and lacunar in 31 (19.25%) (11.11% normoglucémicos, 24.45% DM C preDM).
During the following year, 17 patients (11.49% of those alive at discharge)
suffered a recurrent stroke, affecting
15.38% patients with DM or pre-DM
(14.75% DM; 16.67% pre-DM) and 5.45% normoglycemic patients (P!0.05).
One-year mortality (14.91%) was higher among normoglycemics (19.05% vs
12.24%), as well as in hospital mortality (7.94% vs 6.12%) and infectious
comorbidities during hospital stay (20.63% vs 14.29%), but none of them reached
statistical significance.
Conclusions
As most studies in stroke recurrence, our series demonstrates a higher recurrence rate
not only in diabetics but also in prediabetic patients. On the other hand, in-hospital
and on-year mortality, and in hospital infections were more frequent among non-
diabetic patients. The fact that DM is over represented in lacunar strokes as compared
with cardioembolic strokes may have influenced these results, as mortality and
severity are much higher in those with a known embolic source.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP510
EP511
Clinical factors and severity of diabetic foot infection according to the
PEDIS classification
Adriana de Sousa Lages, Patrícia Oliveira, Susana Queirós, Daniela Guelho,
Luís Cardoso, Nuno Vicente, Diana Martins, Diana Oliveira,
Mara Ventura & Franscisco Carrilho
Coimbra Hospital and University Center, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
The complications related to ulcerated foot lesions are a common cause of
hospitalization among diabetics. Diabetic foot infection is associated with high
morbidity and is the most common precipitating factor to precede amputations of
the lower limbs.
Methods
Retrospective, cohort study; were included 200 patients from the Diabetic Foot
consultation of the Endocrinology Department between 1 January and 31 August
2015. Ulcerated lesions were classified according to the infection part of the
PEDIS classification of the IWGDF.
Results
Our sample consists in 84.5% of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, mean age
62.5G13 years and mean duration of disease of 17.7G13 years. Regarding the
classification of foot, 57.5% were classified as neuroischemic diabetic foot. Of the
200 patients, 51% had active ulcers classified in 31.5% of the patients as grade 1
(nZ63).
Concerning the therapeutic, 77.5% of the patients were under insulin therapy.
Despite the trend towards higher number of patients on insulin therapy in higher
categories of infection, this did not reach statistical significance (PZ0.105).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
The presence of diabetic retinopathy (PZ0.022), previous history of ulcers
(PZ0.000) and osteomyelitis (PZ0.000) and higher values of HbA1c (PZ0.002)
were associated with a significant increase in the severity of infection.
The existence of previous microbiological studies were associated with clinically
more severe infections probably related to the bias of higher patient risk profile
whom studies are requested (PZ0.000).
Patients with no personal history of revascularization surgery (PZ0.019) and no
history of smoking (PZ0.048) were associated with lower ulcerated lesion
classification categories.
Conclusion
Diabetic foot ulcers are highly prevalent and are associated with high morbidity
and mortality. The presence of diabetic retinopathy, previous history of ulcers and
osteomyelitis  and  higher  HbA1c  values  have  an  impact  with  statistical
significance in the direction of worsening infection category.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP511
EP512
Sympathetic dysfunction in patients with diabetes revealed by task force
monitor
Tanja Nisic, Milos Stojanovic, Miroljub Ilic, Drasko Gostiljac,
Srdjan Popovic, Mira Stojkovic, Biljana Beleslin, Slavica Savic,
Marija Barac, Tiana Lalic, Jasmina Ciric & Milos Zarkovic
Clinic of Endocrinology, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
It is common that patients with diabetes have a dominant parasympathetic
dysfunction.
Aim
Assessing the function of the autonomic nervous system in diabetic subjects.
Methodology
Task force monitor was used for testing at rest and passive orthostasis evaluating
baroreceptor sensitivity
(BRS), spectrum  variability  of  RR-interval  of  high
frequencies HF RRI which is linked to the parasympathetic, low frequency
variability of diastolic blood pressure interval LF-DBP, partly linked to effects of
sympathicus, LF HF RRI sympathovagal balance of RR interval. In the first group
were 20 subjects with type 1 diabetes, age X 37 years, of which 12 men and eight
women. The second group contained 25 subjects with type 2 diabetes, age X 62
years of which 18 men and seven women.
Results
In groups with type 1 diabetes LF HF at rest X 1.745 S.D. 0.91; LF HF orthostasis
X 3.08 S.D. 2.65; LF DBP at rest X 44.79 S.D. 16:52; LF DBP orthostasis X 51.91
S.D. 11:41; HF RRI at rest X 36.01 S.D. 14.65; HF RRI orthostasis X 25.98 S.D. 8.2;
BRS at rest X 10.1 S.D. 6.18. In the group with type 2 diabetes LF HF at rest X 4.01
S.D. 7.02; LF HF orthostasis X 4.7 S.D. 8.9; LF DBP at rest X 37.17 S.D. 14.85; LF
DBP orthostasis X 37.32 S.D. 10.89; HF RRI at rest X 43.51; S.D. 17:48; HF RRI
orthostasis X 43.51 S.D. 23:30; BRS at rest X 9.78 S.D. 6.50. Correlation between
the groups showed highly significant difference for LF DBP in orthostasis
(P!0.00067).
Conclusion
Significantly lower values of LF DBP were registered in the group with type 2
diabetes, which represents the ‘failure’ of sympathetic in orthostasis. Analyses
revealed sympathetic dysfunction in patients with type 2 diabetes but not in
subjects with type 1 diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP512
EP513
Bad eating habits among type II diabetic patients at tertiary hospital: a
case-control study
Mohammed Mansoury1, Mohammed Al Zaydi1, Ali Alwan2 &
Ameer Alhusuny2
1College of Medicine, AlNahrain University, Baghdad, Iraq;2College of
Medicine, University of Babylon, Babylon, Iraq.
Background
There is a strong association between type II diabetes mellitus (DM) and gaining
weight. Lifestyle modification is an important factor for weight management to
overcome the obesity as well as DM epidemics.
Aim of study
To find the differences of eating habits and Rosenberg Self-Esteem between DM
patients and control and to find the strongest contributor of risk factors by study
groups.
Methods
A hospital-based matched case-control study design was carried out on (250)
patients with DM and control seen at Diabetic and Endocrine Centre and other
outpatient clinics in Tertiary Teaching Hospital.
Results
There  were  direct  weak  significant  correlations  of  Bad  Eating  Habits  and
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scales by DM patients (rZ0.286, PZ0.001*) and control
(rZ0.314, P!0.001*). DM patients were 0.91 and 0.86 less likely to report bad
eating habits and high Rosenberg Self-Esteem than control, respectively. DM
patients were 19, 18 and 3 times more likely to have brothers and parent with DM
than control as well as to have high HBA1c, respectively.
Conclusion
Assessing eating behaviors of diabetic patients as a routine nutritional assessment
is  an  important  implication  in  patient’s  health.  Therefore,  considering  the
complex association between diabetes and its health related consequences, there
is a considerable need for educating diabetic patients.
Keywords: Bad Eating Habits, Type II Diabetes Mellitus, Rosenberg Self-Esteem
Scale, HBA1c, waist circumference
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP513
EP514
Assessment of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin in diabetic
patients
Alena Sazonava1,2, Tatiana Mokhort1, Volha Shyshko1, Alena Mokhort1 &
Elena Shishko1
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;2Minsk City
Endocrinological Dispensary, Minsk, Belarus.
Background
Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in type 1
diabetes (T1D) patients and associated with increased cardiovascular risk in type
2 diabetes (T2D) patients. Early detection of DN using neutrophil gelatinase-
associated lipocalin (NGAL) assessment can help to reveal predisposed patients
to its progression and to prevent progression of DN. Especially important it is in
patients with normoalbuminuria.
Aim
To determine NGAL concentrations in T1D and T2D patients and its correlation
with HbA1c level and age.
Materials and methods
We included 57 patients with T1D aged 38.79G10.35 (group 1) and 22 patients
with T2D aged 53.15G4.88 (group 2) (P!0.001). GFR was calculated by
Cockcroft-Gault  equation
(ml/min  per
1.73 m2).  Microalbuminuria  was
determined in 24-h collection urine by immunoturbidimetric method. Concen-
tration of NGAL was determined in serum using immunofluorescence assay
(ng/ml).
Results and discussion
There  were  no  significant  difference  in  GFR  between  groups:
96.33G
32.79 ml/min per 1.73 m2 in group 1 and 85.83G20.8379 ml/min per 1.73 m2
in group 2 (P!0,1). Patients were normoalbuminuric. NGAL concentrations
were higher in T2D patients (5.37G2.00 ng/ml) vs T1D (1.57G1.87 ng/ml)
(P!0.001). It is suggested that such factors as age and HbA1c level (8.60G
1.51% in group 1 and 12.17G1.82% in group 2, P!0.001) can affect of NGAL
level.  The  positive  correlation  between  NGAL  concentrations  and  HbA1c
levels(rZ0.45, P!0.05) was revealed. Positive correlation between age and
NGAL level (rZ0.38, P!0.05) was determined. Thus age may present impact
factor on NGAL levels.
Conclusions
T2D is associated with higher level of NGAL compared to T1D. Increase in
NGAL levels in patients with diabetes may be associated with advanced and long-
lasting hyperglycemia as well as with higher age.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP514
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP515
Hydroxyvitamin D status and it is relation to some cardiovascular risk
factors in Egyptian female patients with type 2 diabetes
Zeinab Hassan, Dina Abaza, Mohamed Saed & Inass Hassan
Al Azhar faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction
Recent observational evidence suggests strong links between low vitamin D
levels and a range of cardiovascular risk factors, including hypertension, diabetes,
obesity  and  hyperlipidemia.  In  addition  increased  rate  of  all-cause  and
cardiovascular mortality.
Objectives
To determine 25-hydroxyvitamine D (25(OH) D) levels as well as its relationship
with some cardiovascular risk factors among Egyptian Female patients with type
2 diabetes.
Study design and methodology
This study was conducted on 50 middle age premenopausal type 2 diabetic
patients, compared to 50 age matched apparently healthy women. After complete
clinical examination including body mass index (BMI), waist circumference
(WC), and blood pressure measurements, blood samples were withdrawn to
determine fasting, and postprandial blood glucose levels, HbA1c, lipid profile,
fasting serum insulin and 25(OH) D. HOMA-IR was calculated. Of imaging
techniques, Echocardiography and carotid intima media thickness (CIMT) were
done.
Results
Diabetic patients had significantly lower 25(OH) D levels (54%) ‘deficient’
compared to control group (4%).
25(OH) D was negatively correlated with body weight, BMI, WC, systolic and
diastolic blood pressure, FPG, HbA1c, fasting serum insulin, HOMA-IR, total
cholesterol, triglycerides, left ventricular mass (LVM), left ventricular mass index
(LVMI), and left atrial diameter (LAD).
Conclusion
25(OH) D levels are significantly lower in middle aged Egyptian type 2 diabetic
women compared with controls. Vitamin D concentrations are linked to glucose
homeostasis and insulin resistance. It is associated with cardiovascular risk
factors  such  as  hypertension, obesity and  dyslipidemia.  Low  vitamin D  is
negatively correlated with LVM, LVMI, and LVD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP515
EP516
Assessment of quality of life in anemic and non-anemic patients with
early stages of diabetic nephropathy
Ivan Pchelin1, Alexander Shishkin1, Mikhail Erman1 & Olga Vasilkova2
1Saint Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russia;2Gomel State
Medical University, Gomel, Belarus.
Aims
Anemia occurs early and predicts high risk of cardiovascular events and death in
patients with diabetic nephropathy. The aim of this study was to assess the
influence  of  anemia  on  the  quality  of  life  of  patients  with  early  diabetic
nephropathy.
Methods
We investigated 95 anemic and 32 non-anemic patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus and early diabetic nephropathy (CKD stages 1-3). Anemia was defined
according to WHO criteria. Anemic patients were divided into groups 1-3
according to the stage of CKD. Patients’ quality of life was assessed with SF-36
health survey. Student’s t-test was used for statistical analysis.
Results
As compared to patients without anemia subjects from groups 1-3 had lower
scores of physical role functioning
(49.8G4.2 vs 25.0G7.2, 34.8G3.0 and
12.5G9.6, respectively, P!0.05) and emotional role functioning (57.9G5.2 vs
33.6G5.9, 39.8G3.5 and 33.5G6.2, respectively, P!0.05). Groups 1 and 2 had
no significant differences in other SF-36 sections with the non-anemic group.
Patients in group 3 had lower scores of general health perceptions, physical
functioning,  bodily  pain,  vitality  and  mental  health  than  patients  in  the
non-anemic group: 27.4G4.1 vs 43.3G3.2, 25.0G4.2 vs 65.9G6.9, 43.7G3.3
vs 60.3G3.9, 32.5G5.8 vs 49.6G4.2 and 38.8G3.5 vs 57.8G2.8, respectively
(P!0.05). Social role functioning was similar in all four groups.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
The results of the study suggest that anemia has a substantial influence on
patients’ quality of life in settings of early diabetic nephropathy. Physical role
functioning and emotional role functioning are affected by anemia irrespective of
the CKD stage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP516
EP517
Macular pigment optical density in type 2 diabetes and normal controls:
correlation with vitamin D levels
Neslihan Bayraktar Bilen1, Derya Koseoglu2, Eda Demir Onal2,
Defne Kalayci1 & Dilek Berker2
1Ankara Numune Education and Research Hospital, Department of
Ophthalmology, Ankara, Turkey;2Ankara Numune Education and Research
Hospital, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey.
Aim
To compare macular pigment optical density (MPOD) in diabetic and non-
diabetic patients by using heterochromatic flicker photometry and to investigate
the correlation of MPOD with glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), serum lipid
levels and vitamin D levels.
Methods
Sixty-seven patients with 10/0 visual acuity were divided into group 1 (controls,
n: 35) and group 2 (diabetics without retinopathy, n: 32). MPOD was measured
with a heterochromatic flicker method and compared between groups. Diabetes
duration, smoking status, HbA1c and serum lipid levels and body mass index
were recorded for each patient. The correlation of HbA1C, serum lipid (HDL,
LDL, total cholesterol, and triglycerides) and vitamin D levels with MPOD were
analyzed in both groups.
Results
The mean (GS.D.) age in group 1 (48.74G1.568) and group 2 (51.59G1.527)
were statistically similar (PO0.05). Mean MPOD was not significantly different
between group 1 (0.5589G0.02183) and group 2 (0.5716G0.023) (PO0.05). No
significant correlations were found between MPOD and HbA1C, serum lipid
levels or vitamin D levels in both groups (PO0.05).
Conclusions
Type 2 diabetic patients without retinopathy had not reduced MPOD when
compared with non-diabetic patients. No correlation was found between MPOD,
HbA1C, serum lipid levels and vitamin D levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP517
EP518
Vitamin D deficiency association with microvascular complications in
type 1 diabetic patients
Edita Prakapiene1, Aiste Kondrotiene1, Egle Kreivaitiene1,
Raminta Miezyte3, Karolina Bauraite3, Lina Radzeviciene1,2 &
Rasa Verkauskiene1,2
1Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Department of
Endocrinology, Kaunas, Lithuania;2Lithuanian University Of Health
Sciences (LUHS), Institute of Endocrinology, Kaunas, Lithuania;3LUHS,
Faculty of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Introduction
Low levels of vitamin D are commonly found in people with type 1 diabetes and
recently studies found that vitamin D deficiency (VDD) contributes to the risk of
developing diabetic microvascular complications. The aim was to determine the
relationship between microvascular complications of diabetes and 25-hydro-
xyvitamin D (25(OH)D) levels in type 1 diabetic patients.
Methods
A total of 143 adults (60 male and 83 female) with type 1 diabetes were enrolled
in the study. 25(OH)D level (VD) was measured from October untill April.
Patients with GFR!30 ml/min and with end stage renal disease were excluded
from the study.
Results
Thirty-six (25.2%) type 1 diabetic patients had VDD - VD concentration was
!25 pmol/l and 107 (74.8%) - had no VD deficiency (NVDD) - VD was
O25 pmol/l. Age, sex,duration of diabetes, HbA1c, BMI, lipid profile, eGFR, use
of alcohol, diabetic retinopathy - were no different (PO0.05) comparing between
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
groups of VDD (the mean of VD 19.9G3.64 pmol/l) and NVDD (the mean of VD
42.3G13.73 pmol/l). There were more current smokers (38.9-19.0%, PZ0.05),
patients with GFR 30-59 ml/min (13.9-1.9%, PZ0.016) and macroalbuminuria
O300 mg/24 h (19.8-2.8%, PZ0.05) in VDD group. VDD was more frequent in
patients with multiple microvascular complications (VDD 80%, NVDD 41.9%)
than in those without any complications (VDD 20%, NVDD 58.1%) (PZ0.005)
and in those with diabetic polyneuropathy (VDD 86.1%, NVDD 68.3%), that in
patients  without  complications
(VDD  13.9%,  NVDD  31.7%)  (PZ0.038).
Diabetic nephropathy was associated with VDD (VDD 47.2%, NVDD 22.4%)
compared to patients with no renal complications (VDD 52.8%; NVDD 77.6%)
(PZ0.004). Binary logistic regression analysis revealed that the odds ratio (OR)
for diabetic nephropathy independently increases linearly with VDD (ORZ3.43;
95% CI 1.47-7.96, PZ0.004).
Conclusion
Vitamin D deficiency was more common in type 1 diabetic patients with multiple
microvascular complications and especially in those with diabetic nephropathy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP518
EP519
Diabetes mellitus type-II related hypertension and cardiovascular
diseases: involvement of impaired regulatory renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system
Shamila Shakoor1, Ghazala Kokab Raja2, Sarwat Jahan3, Abida Raza4,
Maleeha Akram1, Syed Ali Raza Kazmi5, Sidrah Nazir2, Afzaal Ahmed
Naseem1, Mazhar Qayyum1 & Syed Shakeel Raza Rizvi1
1Department of Zoology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University
Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan;2University Institute of Biochemistry
and Biotechnology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University
Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan;3Department of Animal Sciences, Quaid-
e-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan;4Nuclear Medicine Oncology and
Radiotherapy Institute (NORI), Islamabad, Pakistan;5Aga Khan Health
Centre, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
Diabetes mellitus type-II (DM-2) is a metabolic disorder characterized by high
blood glucose levels due to insulin resistance and relative insulin deficiency. DM-
2 often leads to hypertension, a prolonged condition of elevated blood pressure
(BP).  Both  hypertension  and  diabetes  have  a  pathological  role  in  causing
cardiovascular diseases
(CVDs). While renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
(RAAS) regulates arterial BP, any pathology in RAAS system may lead to
hypertension and related CVDs. This study investigated the involvement of
RAAS in causing DM-2-related hypertension and CVDs. Hundred male and
female DM-2 hypertensive CVDs patients between ages 21 and 60 years and
hundred  healthy  age-matched  controls  were  examined.  Using  structured
questionnaire, height, weight, BMI, BP, random glucose levels, blood samples,
history, qualification, and socioeconomic status were gathered from both groups.
Plasma  aldosterone  concentrations  were  determined  by  employing  ELISA.
Eighty-one patients were treated with either RAAS inhibitors (RAASi), non-
RAASi or a combination of RAASi and non-RAASi, while 19 patients remained
untreated. Of 20 patients treated with RAASi, 17 responded with aldosterone
concentrations dropping to normal range, whereas 3 remained resistant to RAASi.
Among 21 patients treated with non-RAASi, aldosterone concentrations fell to
normal range in 13, while remained higher in 8 patients. Of 40 patients treated
with both RAASi and non-RAASi, 31 responded with aldosterone concentrations
falling within normal range, while 9 patients did not respond. Nine of 19 untreated
patients  had their aldosterone concentrations within normal  range, whereas
10
patients  exhibited  significantly  higher  aldosterone  concentrations.  The
majority of patients was married, fell in categories of overweight and obese,
regularly exercised and followed diet plan, was illiterate or had primary level
education,  belonged  to  low  and  lower  middle  class  socioeconomic  status.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that the over activity of RAAS may
contribute in causing DM-2-related hypertension and consequent cardiovascular
diseases in our population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP519
EP520
Frequency of occurrence and factors of diabetic retinopathy
advancement in people with DM type 2 in Uzbekistan
Nargiza Normatova2 & Nilufar Ibragimova1
1Charity Union of Persons with Disabilities and People with Diabetes
UMID, Tashkent, Uzbekistan;2Ophthalmology Department at Tashkent
Advanced Training Institute for Doctors, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Goal
To study  a frequency  of occurrence  and factors of progressive diabetic
retinopathy (DR) in people with DM type 2 in Uzbekistan.
Materials and study methods
Within the framework of WDF project ‘Prevention of blindness in people with
diabetes mellitus in Uzbekistan’ granted to ‘UMID’ association in 2008, we
carried out DR screening in people with DM type 2 in three pilot regions of
Ferghana, Bukhara areas and the Republic of Karakalpakstan.
In  three  regions  we  examined
1587  people  with  DM  type  2  aged  40-67
(prescription of disease 5-15 years). Levels of glycemia, HbA1c, cholesterol,
LDL,  HDL  were  measured.  Examination  of  fundus  of  eye,  visual  acuity
determination and intraocular pressure measurement were also carried out.
Results and discussion
Results of examination showed that a frequency of DR occurrence in people with
DM type 2 made 56.9%, of them DR of grade I was found in 32.8%, DR grade II -
18.6%, DR grade II - 5.5% and in 43% of cases no DR was found; 52% of patients
with  prescription  of  the  disease
10-15
years  undertook  ophthalmological
examination for the first time.
DR prevalence in patients with prescription of disease of 10 years made 45%, and
that of 15 years and over - 68%. In 80% of patients at the stage of decompensation
(HbA1cO9.5%) prevalence of DR grades I-III made 36.9, 15.8 and 8.8%
respectively which is a major factor of advanced development of DR.
Mean rates of TC, LDL and HDL made 5.5G0.2 mmol/l; 4.14G0.22 mmol/l and
0.94G0.03 mmol/l respectively, in that a mean value of LDL in PDM was
reliably higher than in patients without DR (3.65G0.07 mmol/l).
Conclusions
According to screening data, a frequency of DR in PDM type 2 in Uzbekistan
makes 56.9%. Advancement of DR in PDM type 2 depends on prescription of
disease, degree of compensation of carbohydrate metabolism, hypercholester-
inemia and dislipidemy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP520
EP521
Determinants of diabetic retinopathy in Moroccan type 2 diabetic
patients: which glycosylated haemoglobin threshold?
Salwa Baki, Ghizlane El Mghari & Nawal El Ansari
Endocrinology and Diabetes Department, University Hospital Mohamed VI,
Marrakesh, Morocco.
Background
Diabetic retinopathy represents a major cause of the blindness worldwide. A
variety of risk factors has been identified in several population, but to date,
comprehensive data concerning our particular risk factors are lacking. The aim of
the study was to determine the risk factors of diabetic retinopathy in Moroccan
type 2 diabetic patients and to determine the threshold of HbA1c predicting
retinopathy.
Materials and methods
All patients 18 years or older diagnosed as type 2 diabetes and who were able to
complete the laboratory data and retinal examination were invited to participate in
the study. The diabetic retinopathy was classified by the ETDRS severity scale.
Data were collected about duration of diabetes, smoking status, medications,
evidence of macrovascular disease, blood pressure, nephropathy or neuropathy
and actual therapeutics. Laboratory parameters included: HbA1c, lipid panel and
microalbuminuria. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 16.0. The
association between DR and each of the risk factors was assessed by bivariate
analysis. A multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to check the
effect of independent variables on DR. the predictors on the binary logistic
regression  model  were  disease  duration,  HbA1c,  systolic  blood  pressure,
nephropathy, neuropathy and evidence of macrovascular disease.
Results
A total of 231 patients were included. The bivariate analysis has identified as risk
factor  for  diabetic  retinopathy:  microvascular  and  macrovascular  diabetic
complications, presence of hypertension, duration of disease, glycemic control
and insulin use. The multivariate regression analysis retrieved as independent risk
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
factors:  glycosylated  hemoglobin  O7%
(OR:
2.71
95%  CI  1.06-7.43),
microalbuminuria (OR: 2.6 95% CI 1.2-5.4), diabetes duration(per 10 years)
(OR: 2.6 95% CI 1.2-5.4) and blood pressure (per 10 mmgh) (OR: 1.27 95% CI
1-1.70).
Conclusion
Our study found similar factors to those described for other populations. We
emphasize on the important role of early medical intervention and adequate
therapeutic education especially concerning the glycemic and blood pressure
control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP521
EP522
Waist circumference is a predictive factor for cardiovascular disease in
diabetic patients
Ergita Nelaj, Margarita Gjata & Mihal Tase
Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Center, Tirana,
Albania.
Introduction
Obesity  worsens  the  prognosis  of  diabetic  patients  by  increasing  the
cardiovascular risk and chronic complications. Waist circumference, as a brief
indicator of visceral obesity, is associated with multi-metabolic disorders and
cardiovascular diseases. The aim of the study was to report the prevalence of WC
in  individuals  with  diabetes  and  find  out  their  association  with  other
cardiovascular risk factors.
Material and Methods
We performed a transversal study, in which 100 patients with essential hyper-
tension, and type 2 diabetes, were evaluated in comparison with 100 patients
with only hypertension. We evaluate these patients for: BMI, waist circumference
(cut offs as 90 cm in men and 80 cm in women); IMT; microalbuminuria; fundus
oculi, LVMI. Serum PCR and lipid concentrations were measured.
Results
A total of 200 hypertensive patients were enrolled in the study (138 female and 62
male, respectively 69 and 31%). Mean age for HTA group was 58.2 (G11.9)
years and for the other group 60.7 (G9.3) years. The diabetic hypertensive
subjects significantly had higher BMI (PZ0.01) and WC statistically significant
(103.6 cm vs 98.3 cm; PZ0.005). There was a significant positive association
between WC and microalbuminuria (PZ0.009); WC and IMT (PZ0.028); Was
seen a relation of waist circumference and diabetic retinopathy; 84% of patients
with abdominal obesity have changes of diabetic retinopathy independently of
stage of changes.
Conclusions
Prevalence of obesity in diabetic hypertensive patients was high. There was a
positive relation of waist circumference and microalbuminuria, IMT, and diabetic
retinopathy. So, abdominal obesity is not only reflects sub-clinical atherosclerosis
in  early  stage,  but  also  predicts  the  progression  of  atherosclerosis  and
development of microalbuminuria. This underlines the importance of measuring
waist  circumference  when  assessing  cardiovascular  risk  factors  in  diabetic
patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP522
EP523
Risk factors of diabetic cardiac autonomic neuropathy in patients with
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus: a meta analysis
Mohamed Dafaalla1, Mohammed Nimir1, Mosab Mohamed1, Omer Ali1 &
Ihab abdalrahman2
1Soba Center for Audit and Research, Soba University Hospital, Khartoum,
Sudan;2Associate Professor of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.
Objectives
We aimed to stratify the possible risk factors for diabetic cardiac autonomic
neuropathy (CAN).
Methods
We did a metaanalysis of risk factors of CAN. We did a web based search for
literature in MEDLINE/PubMed, SCOPUS database, and CENTRAL database up
to August 2015. We included clinical trials or cohort studies that provide data
about relationship between CAN and variables of interest. Our risk factors of
interest were age, sex, duration of diabetes, BMI, systolic (sBP) and diastolic
blood  pressure
[dBP],  HbA1c,  HDL,  LDL,  triglycerides,  retinopathy  and
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
nephropathy. We generated Forest plots, chi squared test and (I2) as tests for
heterogeneity, risk ratio (RR), mean difference (MD), confidence intervals, and
P values by Revman5.3 software.
Results
We found a total of 882 related item. We excluded 873 studies from the title and
abstract and four studies after review of full reports. Four studies were included.
Our meta-analysis showed significant association between CAN and age (MDZ
4.94 [3.46, 6.42]), duration of diabetes (MDZ4.51 [2.51, 6.52]), HbA1c (MDZ
0.48 [0.28, 0.67]), BMI (MDZ0.55 [0.08, 1.01]), serum triglycerides (MDZ0.09
[0.01, 0.17]), proliferative retinopathy (RRZ3.69 [1.20, 11.34]), microalbumi-
nuria (RRZ2.47 [1.43, 4.29]), hypertension (RRZ4.18 [2.52, 6.91]), and sBP
(MDZ4.10 [2.20, 6.00]). We  discovered  absence  of significant  association
between development of CAN and male sex (RRZ1.57 [0.45, 5.39]), dBP (MDZ
0.89 [K0.36, 2.14]), cholesterol level (MDZ1.19 [K0.99, 3.36]), LDL (MDZ
0.12 [K0.15,0.39]), nor HDL level (MDZK0.28 [K0.58,0.03]).
Conclusion
Age,  duration  of  diabetes,  HbA1c,  BMI,  serum  triglycerides,  proliferative
retinopathy, microalbuminuria, hypertension, and systolic blood pressure are
directly related to the risk of development of diabetic CAN.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP523
EP524
Is there a tendency for thrombosis in gestational diabetes mellitus?
Suheyla Gorar1, Bulent Alioglu2, Esra Nur Ademoglu3, Seyit Uyar4,
Handan Bekdemir3, Zehra Candan3, Beylan Saglam5, Gonul Ko
¸3,
Cavit 
¸ ulha3 & Yalcin Aral3
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Antalya Training and
Research Hospital, Antalya, Turkey;2Department of Pediatric Hematology,
Director of Hematology Laboratories, Ankara Training and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;3Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Ankara Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;4Department of
Internal Medicine, Antalya Training and Research Hospital, Antalya,
Turkey;5Hematology Laboratories, Ankara Training and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Aims
Impact of gestational diabetes mellitus on the coagulation system, dynamics
involved at a pathophysiological level and the exact mechanism remain unclear.
To evaluate association between diabetes-related parameters and haemostatic
factors in order to search for a tendency of thrombosis in gestational diabetes
mellitus.
Methods and Material
Nineteen pregnant women who had gestational diabetes mellitus, 16 healthy
pregnant and 13 healthy non-pregnant controls admitted to the Endocrinology
outpatient clinics were enrolled in the study. Fasting and postprandial glucose,
haemoglobin  A1c  and  insulin  levels,  and  insulin  resistance;  fructosamine,
thrombin  activatable  fibrinolysis  inhibitor,  tissue  factor  pathway  inhibitor,
plasminogen  activator  inhibitor  type-1,  tissue  type  plasminogen  activator,
fibrinogen, plasminogen and haemoglobin levels, platelet counts, prothrombin
time, activated partial thromboplastin time were studied. One-Way analysis of
variance, Kruskal Wallis and post hoc Tukey HSD or Conover’s non-parametric
multiple comparison tests for comparison of the study groups.
Results
Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were significantly
lower in gestational diabetes mellitus patients compared to controls (P!0.05),
while fibrinogen and plasminogen levels were significantly higher in this group
compared to both non-pregnant and healthy pregnant controls (P!0.05 for each).
Thrombin  activatable  fibrinolysis  inhibitor,  tissue  factor  pathway  inhibitor,
plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 and tissue type plasminogen activator
levels were not significantly different among groups.
Conclusions
Our findings indicate tendency to develop thrombosis in gestational diabetes
mellitus similar to diabetes mellitus; but more comprehensive studies with larger
sample size are needed to determine the relationship between gestational diabetes
mellitus and haemostasis. Levels of coagulation factors may vary in different
stages of pregnancy and postpartum period with diverse etiopathogenesis. Similar
to previously reported studies, our study suggests that GDM may play a role in the
pathogenesis leading to a thrombotic tendency similar to diabetes mellitus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP524
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP525
Analysis of disability in population due to diabetic ophthalmopathy
Shirin Djamalova & Shakhnoza Iskandarova
Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Introduction
Among the complications of diabetes ophthalmic are among the most severe.
Uzbekistan’s population is over 30 million people; according to statistics the
number of diabetes patients is 130 000 people, but the real number is at least six
times bigger - more than 800 000 (WHO). Our study aimed to investigate the
disability features due to ocular complications of diabetes in Tashkent within
10 years.
Methods
Data of examinations in specialized ophthalmic medical-social expert commis-
sions in Tashkent of diabetic patients for the 2003-2012 years was studied. The
total number of disabled people was 307; patients with Type 1 - 13%, 2 - 87%;
men - 59% women - 41%; the mean age was 55 years.
Results
The level of total disability due to ocular complications of diabetes is not high: in
2003-2006 - 0.23 per 10 000 adults, decreasing to 0.17 in 2007; in 2008 - 0.14; in
2009 - 0.09; in 2010 - 0.11; in 2011 - 0.13; in 2012 - 0.11. On average, it was equal
to 0.16 on 10 000 of the adult population. The share of new disability cases -
35.9% is significantly less than the number of repeatedly recognized disabled -
64.1%. From the new cases of disability group I disabled - 49.6%, group II -
47.2% and group III - 3.2%. Among repeatedly recognized, group I - 69.5%,
group II - 24.7% and group III - 5.8%. Analysis of the structure by age of
disability shows that in both primary (52.7%) and repeated disability (46.5%) a
significant proportion is working-age population.
Conclusion
Prevention of ophthalmic complications of diabetes will not only reduce the state
budget expenses, but will also improve the quality of patients life.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP525
EP526
Diabetic muscle infarction in a 54-year-old female: a case report
Ema Lumi1, Entela Puca2, Blertina Dyrmishi4, Sonila Bitri2, Edmond Puca3,
Petrika Pengo1 & Agron Ylli3
1Regional Hospital of Korca, Korce, Albania;2American Hospital II of
Tirana, Tirane, Albania;3Universitar Hospital Center ‘Nene Tereza’,
Tirane, Albania;4Hygea Hospital, Tirane, Albania.
Introduction
Diabetic muscle infarction is a very uncommon complication of diabetes and
predominately occurs in type 1 diabetes (70% of cases) or long standing poorly
controlled type 2 diabetic patients, often misdiagnosed as cellulitis. It is defined as
spontaneous  ischemic  necrosis  of  skeletal  muscle  that  is  unrelated  to
atheroembolism or occlusion of major arteries.
Case presentation
We report a case of 54-years-old women non-smoker with an 8 years history of
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Glycemic control had been unsatisfactory during the last
years, HbA1c over 12%. The patient presented with a 2 days history not being
able to walk. Her symptoms started about 2 weeks ago. One morning she was
awoken with a sudden onset of right thigh pain and swelling. The pain increased
during exercise. No preceding trauma, fever, animal bites or infection. On
physical exam, she had a localized, tender area with swelling and indurations of
the surrounding tissue, no skin erythema. She was apyrexial. Her white cell count
was 10.700/l in normal range, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was normal
20 mm/h. HbA1c was 13.9% range from 4.8-6.1, blood glucose 25.5 mmol/l. She
had normal creatinine kinase (62 UI/l). Additional diabetic workup failed to
reveal any signs of retinopathy or neuropathy. Deep venous thrombosis was
excluded by Doppler ultrasound on both legs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
in both coronal and axial planes demonstrating on T2-weighted images a high-
intensity signal in the intra- and perimuscular tissues of the left vastus medialis
muscle secondary to edema and necrosis. She did not required surgery or biopsies.
Glycemic  control  was established  with  intensive  insulin  therapy,  pain  was
controlled with analgesic medication, bed rest and corticosteroids for edema. The
patient gradually recovered over the period of w4 weeks.
Conclusion
Diabetic muscle infarction is a rare complication of diabetes, which should be
suspected in any diabetic subject with uncontrolled and longstanding diabetes who
presents with a painful swollen limb. The diagnosis can be made when the
characteristic clinical presentation is combined with a typical MR imaging results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP526
EP527
Detection of hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetic patients
Sofia Tsirona1, Christos Pappas1, Eleni Kandaraki2, Georgia Kassi2,
Genovefa Chronopoulou1 & Evanthia Diamanti-Kandarakis1
1Unit, Diabetes Center and Biochemistry Laboratory Athens Euroclinic,
Athens, Greece;2Endocrine Unit 3rd Department of Medicine University of
Athens Medical School Athens Greece, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Hypoglycemia consists a significant problem in insulin treated type 2 diabetic
patients. The present study compared the incidence of hypoglycemic episodes in
type 2 diabetics between continuous glucose monitoring/CGM vs self monitoring
of blood glucose/SMBG.
Methods
Seventeen patients with type 2 diabetes underwent a 24 h CGM for a period of
3-5 consecutive days. At the same period they recorded their glucose values using
SMBG from four daily measurements. The main end points were: i) potential
differences in detection of hypoglycemic episodes depending on the recording
method (CGM vs SMBG) and ii) assessment of the recorded hypoglycemic
episodes pattern (nocturnal vs no nocturnal hypoglycemia).
Results
According  to  CGM,  ten  type  2  diabetic  patients  experienced  at  least  one
hypoglycemic episode, while four patients experienced at least one hypoglycemic
episode as illustrated by SMBG (58.8% vs 23.5%, PZ0.07). i) 23 hypoglycemic
episodes were recorded by CGM vs eight episodes which were recorded using
SMBG (mean 1.35 vs 0.48, PZ0.008) ii) four patients (23.5% of type 2 diabetic
subjects) were detected by CGM suffering from nocturnal hypoglycemia. In
contrast, no nocturnal hypoglycemic episodes detected and none recorded by
SMBG, since no patient performed glucose measurements during the night. In
addition to, six patients recorded hypoglycemia while they were alert, four of
whom (23.5%) were asymptomatic.
Conclusions
In type 2 diabetic patients more hypoglycemic episodes are detected using
CGM than SMBG (24 vs 8, PZ0.008). Furthermore, 23.5% of type 2 diabetics
experience  nocturnal  hypoglycemia  and  an  equal  percentage  experience
unawareness  of  hypoglycemia  undetected  by  SMBG.  In  conclusion,  CGM
seems to be a useful tool for the detection and assessment of hypoglycemia in
type 2 diabetic patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP527
EP528
Diabetes mellitus, pre-dialysis, extreme anxiety, and sarcoidosis
Usman Shah1, Erik Soule1, Yasmin Nikookam1, Ajit James1, Edel Casey1,2
& Khash Nikookam1,2
1King George Hospital, Barking Havering and Redbridge University Trust,
Greater London, UK;21. King George Hospital, Barking Havering and
Redbridge University Trust, 2. London Medical Clinic Ltd. 9A Hartlepool
Court, Greater London, UK.
Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of chronic kidney disease and is
responsible for 30-40% of all end stage renal disease (1). Where there is rapid
decline in eGFR, we should also consider other aetiologies.
This is the case of a 65-year-old Caucasian gentleman with complex presentation
and novel management strategy with type 2 diabetes mellitus since 1999 which
was effectively managed, evident by reasonable control of HBA1c; Pharma-
cotherapy regimen was modulated sensitive to patient tolerability and outcome.
On subsequent follow up his creatinine was 389 umol/l from baseline of around
160 umol/l. When patient was informed of possibility of dialysis over coming
year, it caused him severe anxiety. During history taking, it was revealed that the
patient had an episode of anterior uveitis. Thorough physical examination led to
the discovery of an erythematous lesion on his left shin, and meticulous review of
laboratory findings revealed intermittent hypercalcemia. This triad of obser-
vations led to discover shadowing, suspicious of hilar lymphadenopathy on chest
X-ray: Hence moderate-dose prednisolone therapy was initiated for presumptive
sarcoidosis; Biopsy was precluded due to body habitus. Corticosteroids provided
a rapid return of creatinine to baseline, however, necessitated introduction of
insulin due to induction of hyperglycaemia. On subsequent commencement of
azathioprine, prednisolone dosages were rapidly reduced, and insulin requirement
were significantly reduced.
Conclusion
Encourage physicians to consider alternative aetiologies to diabetic nephropathy
for rather swift deterioration of renal function in patient with diabetes, such as
renal sarcoidosis. Secondly, rapid withdrawal of moderate-dose corticosteroids
and substitution with a steroid-sparing agent as a novel therapeutic modality for
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
treatment of renal sarcoidosis in the setting of diabetes mellitus was superior to
the established protocol (2, 3). This sequential pharmacotherapy has preserved
quality of life, as renal failure requiring long-term haemodialysis was imminent,
and corticosteroid withdrawal allowed for continuing better glycaemic control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP528
EP529
Good renal and vital prognosis of metformin induced Lactic acidosis
Antoine Casel, Nathalie Memain, Nicolas Gambier, Bruno Verdière &
Régis Cohen
Centre Hospitalier de Saint-Denis, Saint Denis, France.
Metformin Associated Lactic Acidosis (MALA) is defined by a Ph !7.35 and
lactate levels greater than 5 mM. It must be distinguished from other lactic
acidosis usually secondary to septic shock. Renal functional prognosis and
mortality are not clearly separated in publications and many make the amalgam
between the two entities with an estimated mortality of 30 to 50% and poor renal
prognosis.
We did a retrospective, observational, cohort study of patients who were admitted
consecutively in intensive care unit for MALA between January 2010 and July
2015 in a tertiary hospital.
Seventeen patients, nine men; mean age 60 years were included. The presumed
cause of MALA was renal insufficiency by dehydration in seven, sepsis in seven,
and voluntary intoxication in three.
The mean initial Ph was 7.05 (extreme 6.58 to 7.35), lactacidemia: 10.33 mM
(extreme 5.12 to 15.2), creatinine was 551 mM (extreme 56 to 1338), blood
glucose: 1.62 g/L (extreme 0.29 to 4.5). The ICU stay was of 10.2 days (extreme 1
to 26). Only two patients deceased because of septic shock. Fifteen had abnormal
creatinine clearance !60 ml/min, 14 recovered of their renal insufficiency.
Eleven out of seventeen patients had dialysis to prevent the ionized calcium
decrease, volume overload, hyperosmolality and remove metformin.
Thus at the opposite of Lactic Acidosis due to others causes, MALA represents a
situation with good prognosis and rapid renal improvement by dialysis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP529
EP530
A rare case of acute renal failure: rhabdomyolysis due to hyperosmolar
hyperglycemic state
Tugrul Burak Genc1, Yildiz Okuturlar1, Hakan Kocoglu1, Samet Sayilan1,
Yesim Ozdem Inan1, Ezgi Erdogan1, Meral Mert2, Betul Erismis1,
Bahar Ozdemir1, Ozlem Harmankaya1 & Abdulbaki Kumbasar1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Education and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology,
Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Introduction
Rhabdomyolysis is usually attributed to trauma. However, there is an association
of rhabdomyolysis with hyperosmolar states. It is also important to realize that
hyperosmolar coma can be the presenting complaint of a diabetic seeking medical
attention for the first time. In this case-report we aimed to present a patient with
acute kidney injury due to rhabdomyolysis and hyperosmolar state.
Case report
Forty nine-year-old black male patient was brought to emergency room because
of new onset confusion during an international flight. His past medical history was
remarkable for only asthma. Bibasilar decreased breath sounds and 2C bilateral
pretibial edema were detected on physical examination. His laboratory studies
were as follows: blood glucose 1505 mg/dl, urea 163 mg/dl, creatinine 9.8 mg/dl,
creatine-kinase
(CK) 45,750 U/l, sodium (Na) 146 mmol/l, potassium (KC)
4.67 mmol/l, blood pH 7.3, osmolarity 368 mosm/l. His urinary ultrasonography
was  normal.  The  patient  was  brought  to  intensive  care  unit  and  received
continuous  arteriovenous  hemofiltration.  His  consciousness  level  gradually
improved, his urinary output increased and creatinine level decreased to normal
value. The patient was discharged after his blood glucose levels were controlled.
Result
The exact mechanism of rhabdomyolysis in a hyperosmolar state remains unclear.
Singhal et al. concluded that serum sodium, osmolality and glucose levels are the
major determinants for the occurrence of rhabdomyolysis in the diabetic state.
Pharmaceutical agents, alcohol, illicit drugs, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia,
hypothermia and hyperosmolar situations are significant causes of rhabdomyo-
lysis. To our knowledge, there are around a dozen cases reported in the literature.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Although it is rarely clinically important, it has been suggested that over 50% of
patients presenting with hyperosmolar state may develop rhabdomyolysis to
greater or lesser degree.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP530
EP531
Clinical profile of type 2 diabetic patients suffering of erectile
dysfunction
Marwa Omri, Kamilia Ounaissa, Asma Ben Brahim & Abdelmajid Abid
National Institute of Nutrition, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
The number of patients with diabetes has been increasing at an alarming pace for
the last decade. Sexuality is frequently affected in diabetic patients.
The aim of this study was to describe the clinical profile of a group of type 2
diabetic patients suffering of erectile dysfunction (ED).
Methodology
This was a cross-sectional study involving a population of 70 type 2 diabetic
patients recruited from the day hospital during May and June 2015.
All men were invited to complete a sexual activity questionnaire (the abridged
five-item version of the International Index of Erectile Function-IIEF-5) as a
diagnostic tool for ED.
Results
Of  the  70  patients  studied,
61  suffer  of  erectile  dysfunction.  The  erectile
dysfunction is mild, moderate and severe in respectively 47.1, 19 and 33.9% of
cases. 81.9% of the subjects are smokers. 65.5% are overweight and 32.7% have
dyslipidemia. The average HbA1c is 10.62%. Men with ED were significantly
older than subjects without ED. On our study, the onset of ED is directly
correlated  to  diabetes’  duration.  Cardiovascular  risk  factors  as  well  as
degenerative complications are associated with an increased risk of ED.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP531
EP532
Diabetic papillopathy with macular edema treated with intravitreal
ranibizumab
Moosang Kim
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea.
Introduction
We report a case of diabetic papillopathy that demonstrated a resolution of optic
disk swelling and rapid visual recovery when intravitreal ranibizumab was
administered.
Case report
A 51-year-old male presented with acute painless visual loss in his right eye. His
vision was 20/320 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. Fundus examination
of the right eye showed nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy with macular edema
and a swollen optic disk. Fluorescein angiography showed dye leakage from the
right optic disk. Optical coherent tomography revealed a significant increase in
retinal nerve fiber-layer thickness. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was
normal. The patient received a single intravitreal ranibizumab (0.5 mg) injection.
Two weeks following injection, there was marked regression of the disk swelling
and improvement of macular edema, with vision improving to 20/100. Three
months following injection, there was complete resolution of the optic disk
swelling. No further treatment was required.
Conclusions
A rapid improvement in vision was noted in our patient shortly after intravitreal
injection of ranibizumab. Therefore, it may be that the intravitreal ranibizumab
played a positive role in stabilizing and improving the patient’s optic nerve
edema.  However,  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  this  management  of  diabetic
papillopathy needs to be proven through further larger clinical studies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP532
EP533
Diabetes and rhino-orbito-cerebral mucormycosis
Claudia Matta-Coelho, Diana Silva, Sofia Daniela Carvalho, José Amorim,
Ana Margarida Monteiro, Selma B Souto & Olinda Marques
Braga Hospital, Braga, Portugal.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Rhino-orbito-cerebral mucormycosis is a rare invasive fungal infection more
common in diabetic and elderly patients. The presentation is acute, severe and
rapidly progressive to disseminated infection. The diagnosis is done by the
identification of risk factors, clinical and radiologic signs and tissue biopsy
consistent with mucormycosis. The mortality rate is high, so timely diagnosis and
intervention lead to better outcomes.
Clinical case
Male patient,
85-years-old, with a past medical history of diabetes type
2
medicated with Vildagliptin/Metformin 50/850 mg twice a day, hypertension,
glaucoma  and  prostatic  adenocarcinoma.  With  good  metabolic  control,  as
described in previous medical records. The patient was admitted to the emergency
department because of right eye inflammation, epistaxis and nasal congestion
over a period of 24 h. At physical examination he showed exophthalmia and right
periorbitary edema. The plasmatic glycemia was 480 mg/dl and bioinflammatory
parameters were elevated. The CT scan revealed: ‘Right ethmoidal-maxillary
sinusitis and ipsilateral periorbitary cellulitis with post septal component’. The
patient was admitted to ENT department and underwent nasal endoscopy and
a biopsy  was  performed  to  remove  tissue  from  the  sites  of  infection  for
examination. Initially treated with antibiotic, later on switched to amphotericine
B due to fungal disease confirmation. The histological examination was consistent
with mucormycosis. During hospitalization the patient’s glucose levels improved.
On the 5th day the clinical state aggravated and on the 16th day of hospitalization
the patient died due to multi-organ dysfunction.
Discussion
This clinical case is relevant due to the gravity of the disease in the context of
hyperglycemia. Owing to the increased number of newly diagnosed cases of
mucormycosis worldwide resulting from uncontrolled metabolic conditions this is
a disease to have in mind. Therefore any diabetic patient with sinonasal disease,
regardless  of  metabolic  control,  should  prompt  evaluation  to  rule  out
mucormycosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP533
EP534
Lipemic diabetic ketoacidosis as a presentation of type 1 diabetes
mellitus
Amudha Doraiswamy & Adelyn Henry
Hospital Melaka, Melaka, Malaysia.
Introduction
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a complication of insulin deficiency and can
rarely be associated with diabetic lipemia, which is a life threatening condition.
Case report
We report a 20-year-old male, who visited emergency department with a short
history of abdominal pain and vomiting. Clinically he was alert, had kussmaul’s
breathing, and was found to be hyperglycaemic, with metabolic acidosis and
ketonemia (RBS 18, Ph 7.18 HCO3 8.4). His venous blood appeared grossly
lipemic (Triglyceride 35 mmol/l). Amylase was normal. His DKA was treated in
accordance with the British Joint society of Diabetes guidelines. The initial
management dilemma we faced were laboratory interference due to hyperlipi-
daemia that lead to a delay in resolution of DKA. His diabetes autoantibodies
were detected, however, Lipoprotein lipase genetic testing was not done as it is
not available in our region. His lipids normalised on follow up.
Discussion
In DKA, insulin deficiency activates lipolysis in the adipose tissue releasing free
fatty  acids,  which  accelerates  formation  of  VLDL,  together  with  reduced
lipoprotein  lipase  activity  results  in  hypertriglyceridemia.  Evaluation  of
electrolytes are pivotal in the management of DKA due to the rapid infusion of
insulin and fluids. As seen in our case, lipemic samples cause analytical errors and
pose  challenges  to  fluid  management  and  electrolyte  replacement  in  the
management of DKA, due to the difficulties in analysis, especially those without
ultracentrifuges. In such circumstances, emphasis should be placed on clinical
evaluation followed by hydration and insulin administration which assists in the
resolution of DKA and eventually lipemia. If available, the use of high speed
micro centrifuges showed effectivity in reducing lipid levels provided a suitable
alternative to ultra-centrifuges.
Conclusion
Severe hyperlipidaemia causing lipemic serum in patients with DKA is rare
phenomenon, and clinicians should consider devastating consequences such as
acute pancreatitis or lipemic retinalis, thus prompt insulin administration is
pivotal.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP534
EP535
Diplopia as a presenting symptom of diabetes mellitus
Yasemin Aydog˘ an Unsal1, Fatma Kaplan Efe1, Selcen Deveci1,
Esin Beyan1, Gulin Morkavuk2 & Mustafa Altay1
1Training and Research Hospital, Internal Medicine Clinic, Ankara, Turkey;
2Keçioren Training and Research Hospital, Neurology Department, Ankara,
Turkey.
Introduction
The neuropathies are one of the most common complications seen in diabetes,
affecting up to 50% of diabetic patients. Isolated or combined paralysis of 3rd, 4th
and 6th cranial nerve can be seen.
Case presentation
Sixty-six-year-old male patient was admitted to the neurology department with
the complaints of diplopia persisting for 15 days. Cranial images revealed no
abnormal findings. Patient was directed to internal medicine clinic due to the
complaints of weight loss, thirst and polyuria in detailed interrogation. Due to
detecting fasting blood glucose level of 317 mg/dl and postprandial blood glucose
level of 535 mg/dl in laboratory tests, he was admitted to the internal medicine
service. HbA1c was measured as 12%. Insulin therapy was initiated. When the
patient was consulted to clinic of ophthalmology, the 6th cranial nerve palsy was
identified and recommended a clinic of ophthalmology control every 6 months.
He was discharged with advice to go to the clinic control.
Discussion
Cranial mononeuropathy is one of more frequent vascular and neuropathic
complications  in  the  presence  of  advanced  age  and  long  standing,  poorly
controlled DM. It should be kept in mind that DM can be diagnosed with non-
specific and rare symptoms of eyes such as diplopia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP535
EP536
The presence of risk factors for type 2 diabetes and glucose tolerance in
pregnant women
Violeta Mladenovic1, Aleksandar Djukic1 & Djuro Macut2
1CC Kragujevac, Kragujevac, Serbia;2CC Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
Background
Pregnancy is a state of insulin resistance that can predict diabetes development in
some women, and is associated with increased risk for neonate and for mother.
Frequency of glucose intolerance may be increased in the follow-up years.
Aim
The aim of this study is to determine the presence of risk factors for type 2
diabetes and degree of glucose tolerance in population of pregnant women.
Materials and methods
The study included 77 healthy pregnant women in third trimester registered in
centre for endocrinology CC Kragujevac that were tested, according to conducted
3 h OGTT with 100 g glucose (ADA criteria).
Results
Patients were average 30.8G4.7(19-41) years old. The frequency of risk factors
were: obesity (3.9%), hypertension (5.2%), previous gestational diabetes mellitus
(23.5%), smoking (23.4%), previous maternity body weight O4 kg (8.8%),
positive family history for diabetes (27.3%). Prepregnancy BMI of participants
was 22.0G2.6 kg/m2, weight gain during pregnancy was obtained as 12.7G
1.5 kg. It was shown that there was impact the number of risk factors on degree of
glucose tolerance disorder (PZ0.034), while most of patients had no risk factor
(48%). Between 77 patients, the nine was with gestational diabetes mellitus and
nine was with minimal disorder of glicoregulation. Including parameters of
adverse outcome, it was shown that number of risk factors significantly impact on
pregnancy outcome (P!0.005).
Conclusion
This research showed presence some of risk factors for type 2 diabetes in more
than half of pregnant women. Women with glucose intolerance have higher risk
for diabetes development.
Keywords: risk factor, diabetes, pregnancy
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP536
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP537
Calculator for myocardial infarction risk in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus
Feruza Takhirova & Zairkhodja Akbarov
Center for the Scientific and Clinical Study of Endocrinology, Tashkent,
Uzbekistan.
Study was initiated to perform integral assessment of myocardial infarction (MI)
risk in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus with genetic markers taken into
account as well as to develop a method for its prediction in this category of
patients. As to relative risk of factors causing MI in Uzbek patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus, myocardial infarction in family medical history comes the first
followed by left ventricular hypertrophy, age, ACE gene DD genotype, arterial
hypertension,  diabetes  duration,  diabetic  nephropathy,  alcohol  abuse,
HbA1c%7%,  obesity  (BMIO25 kg/m2),  stroke  in  family  medical  history,
dislipidemia, TCF7L2 gene TT genotype, smoking and hypercoagulation. This
type of rating is essential in a physician’s practice to categorize MI risk contingent
among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Possible ranges of risk for all factors
above were determined after calculation of MI risk relative risk parameters. It is
expedient to divide the whole risk range into subranges which allow categorizing
patients by various risk probability for the risk factors known. Thus, there are
three MI risk subranges for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: the lowest MI
risk subrange is for patients with favorable prognosis and minimum MI risk,
intermediate MI risk subrange is for patients who have higher probability of MI
and require focusing of physicians’ attention and the highest MI risk subrange is
for patients with unfavorable prognosis maximally affected by MI risk factors.
Contrary to existing analogues, genetic risk factors, such as ACE gene DD
genotype and TCF7L2 gene TT genotype, typical of Uzbek population are taken
into account for MI prediction in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, as well.
Prediction of MI risk degree in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus facilitates
timely interventions corresponding to MI risk degree. That will help delay or
prevent MI, or smooth its course with minimal or no complications. Integral
assessment  of  MI  risk  factors  is  a  comprehensive  strategy  for  myocardial
infarction prevention in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. It makes possible
for practical healthcare to combine a patient’s social and clinical characteristics
for the purposes of assessment of MI risk and prediction of MI progression, and
thereby using the latest achievements in endocrinology and cardiology to perform
appropriate interventions on early stages of the disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP537
EP537B
Renal function reserve state in patients with diabetic kidney disease
Kateryna Kuznetsova1,2
1Odessa Regional Clinical Medical Center, Odessa, Ukraine;2Ukrainian
Research Institute of Transport Medicine, Ministry of Health of Ukraine,
Odessa, Ukraine.
Kidneys reserve mechanisms are of great scientific and practical interest.
In 56 patients with diabetes mellitus two types and diabetic kidney disease
(DKD), 24 men (42.9%) and 32 women (57.1%) aged from 38 to 81 years (61.3G
2.65) had been estimated the renal functional reserve (RFR) with water-salt load
of 0.5% NaCl in the amount of 0.5% body mass to determine the reduction of
nephron’s amount using the level of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) before
loading (with formula of GFR - EPI) and after loading (with clearance of
creatinine).
In patients with DKD 1 and 2 stage after water-salt load of 435G37.1 and 465G
49.9 ml, urine output was 249G55.5 ml and 220G102 ml with albumin excretion
of 7.96G4.87 and 6.54G2.54 mg/mmol. The GFR level increased from 95.1G
1.88 to 226G60.2 ml/min and from 72.4G4.47 to 173G47.7 ml/min, the renal
function reserve averaged 226G60.2 and 137G61.3 ml/min, accordingly. In
patients with CKD 3a and 3b stage after loading of 432G58.8 ml, the urine output
was 179G48.4 ml with albumin excretion of 16.63G9.98 mg/mmol. GFR level
increased from
55.7G2.49 to 176G36.3 ml/min and renal function reserve
averaged 216G59.3 ml/min.
In the renal function study were found that in 92.8% of patients with DKD 1 stage,
in 50% of patients with DKD 2 stage and in 46.4% patients with DKD 3 stage
despite markers of kidney damage like albuminuria or GFR bellow 60 ml/min,
kidneys were able to increase the glomerular filtration rate to the level of
standards and there was no reduction of the amount of functioning nephrons.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP537B
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Diabetes therapy
EP538
Liraglutide as additional treatment to insulin in patient with latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA): a case report
Iuliia Silko, Tatiana Nikonova & Marina Shestakova
Endocrinology Research Centre, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
LADA exhibits characteristics of both type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) and type 2
DM. Patients with LADA usually have some components of metabolic syndrome.
GLP-1 agonists have been widely used in type 2 DM. GLP-1 agonist therapies
have shown some promising glucose lowering effect in T1DM. Almost no
information is available on glucagon and incretin secretion in patients with LADA
as well as effects on glucose and C-peptide levels.
Case report
A 40-year-old  man  with  BMI  29.4 kg/m2,  diagnosed  with  LADA-diabetes
(duration 6 months) had GADA and ICA - positive autoantibodies, fasting plasma
C-peptide 1.8 ng/ml (1.1-4.4). The patient received insulin treatment. Mixed
meal tolerance test (MMTT) was performed before and after treatment with
liraglutide 1.8 mg in addition to insulin during next 6 months. Plasma glucose
(PG), glucagon and C-peptide were measured at 0 min, 30 and 120 min during
MMTT. HbA1c was measured before and after treatment. Informed consent was
obtained from the participant. After the treatment HbA1c decreased from 10.5%
to 7.4%. Dose of long-acting insulin was reduced and fast-acting insulin was
abolished.  BMI  reduced  from
29.4 kg/m2
to
26.3 kg/m2.  Plasma  glucose
decreased  from
10.3 mmol/l  to
6.2 mmol/l  on
30 min  and  from
9.6
to
8.1 mmol/l on 120 min. Liraglutide reduced glucagon levels from 153.2-179.3-
226.7 pg/ml (on 0, 30, 120 min respectively) to 150-164-138 pg/ml. Plasma
fasting C-peptide level has become 2.3 ng/ml after 6 months.
Conclusion
Addition of liraglutide to insulin in patient with LADA leads to improvement in
glycemic control, HbA1c and reduction in insulin dose and body weight. It
reduces glucagon levels and serves to increase C-peptide.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP538
EP539
Patients’ understanding of hypoglycaemia in tertiary referral centers
Mi-Kyung Kim1, Nam Kyeong Kim1, Eui Hyun Kim2, Keun-Gyu Park3 &
Hye-soon Kim1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Keimyung University Dongsan Medical
Center, Daegu, Republic of Korea;2Department of Internal Medicine,
Fatima Hospital, Daegu, Republic of Korea;3Department of Internal
Medicine, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu,
Republic of Korea.
Objective
Hypoglycemia is a common adverse event and one of the main obstacles to
achieving good glycemic control to minimize the risk of diabetic complications in
patients with diabetes. Therefore, most physicians try to reduce hypoglycemia
events through education about hypoglycaemia, such as diabetes self-manage-
ment education. In this study, we surveyed the actual insight about hypoglycemia,
behavior  of  diabetic  patients  to  avoid  hypoglycemia  and  the  fear  of
hypoglycemia.
Methods
We conducted the survey for patients with diabetes who visited seven tertiary
referral centers in Korea from June 2014 to June 2015. The questions sought
information  about  personal  history,  symptom,  education  experience,  self-
management and fear about hypoglycemia.
Results
In
758
participants  enrolled,
471
patients
(62.13%)  have  experienced
hypoglycemia and 274 patients (36.14%) had recently experience of hypogly-
caemia at least once in a month. Eighty-five (27.9%) patients have experience a
lecture about hypoglycemia at least once (average 2.2 times). But only 19.4% of
patients knew exactly the definition of hypoglycemia. Among the 12 correct
hypoglycemic symptoms in questionnaire, most participants chose dizziness
(55.01%), sweating (53.82%), and hunger (33.24%). To recover from hypo-
glycemia, 40% of patients ate something first and they mostly ate candy (62.13%),
chocolate (37.73%) and juice (36.80%); 51% of participants did not tell about
hypoglycemic events before their doctor asked.
Participants who had experienced hypoglycemia had higher hemoglobin A1c,
longer duration of diabetes and more use of insulin. Mean score of behavior to
avoid hypoglycemia is 21.2G10.71 and worry about hypoglycemia is 23.38G
13.19. These scores are higher than participants who had Hb A1cO 8% and
insulin users.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Doctors  should  pay  more  attention  to  how  anxious  patients  are  about
hypoglycaemia. We must educate patients about what to do when they feel
hypoglycemic symptoms, especially for patients who have the higher chance to
experience hypoglycemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP539
EP540
Impact of obesity on management of type 2 diabetes
Seong Keat Cheah1,2, Catherine Duane1,2, Abigail Durak2,
Seamus Sreenan1,2, John McDermott1,2 & Tommy Kyaw Tun1,2
1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland;2Connolly Hospital
Blanchardstown, Dublin, Ireland.
Management of type-2 diabetes (T2D) should be individualised given recent
increase in treatment options. There is a spectrum of phenotype of T2D from
thinner  patients  who  may  be  more  insulin  deficient  to  those  who  are
overweight/obese  and  insulin  resistant.  We  hypothesized  that,  if  we  are
personalising treatment, thinner patients would be more likely to be treated
with  insulin  secretagogues.  To  compare  the  management  between  these
phenotypes, we reviewed 1007 patients with T2D consecutively attending for
annual review. Patients were divided into quartiles by body mass index and those
in the lowest (nZ252, age 63G13 years) and highest (nZ252, age 60G12)
quartiles were compared (data are meanGS.D. PZ0.001 for comparison of age).
Phenotypic and biochemical data were compared using t tests and proportions
on different treatments were compared using c2  test. Systolic blood pressure,
total and LDL cholesterol and eGFR, calculated using the MDRD equation, were
not different between the groups. The mean BMI in the lowest quartile was
25.1G2 kg/m2  compared to 40.2G5 kg/m2  in the highest quartile, P!0.001).
Mean  HbA1c  was  54G15 mmol/mol  in  the  lowest  quartile  compared  to
59G19 mmol/mol in the highest, PZ0.001. In the lowest quartile, 14% of
patients were on insulin, 28% on sulfonylureas and 71% on metformin, compared
to 25, 37 and 81% in the highest quartile, respectively, P!0.05 in each case.
More patients in the highest quartile were on GLP-1 agonists (13% vs 2% in the
lowest quartile) but DPP4 inhibitors use was similar. In summary, thinner patients
were  slightly  older  and  had  slightly  better  glycemic  control,  despite  less
aggressive  glycemia  management.  We  believe  that  this  reflects  a  different
underlying pathophysiology of diabetes between these phenotypes and highlights
the need for a personalised approach to T2D management.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP540
EP541
PPARG2 Pro12Ala, TNFa G(308)A and G(238)A, LIPC C(-514)T, ACE
I/D, SLCO1B1 Val174Ala polymorphism as predictors of lipid-lowering
response to statin therapy in patients with T2DM
Nadezhda Ol Lebedeva1, Olga K Vikulova1, Alexei G Nikitin2,
Minara Sh Shamkhalova1 & Marina V Shestakova1
1Federal State Budgetary Establishment Endocrinology Research Centre,
Ministry of Health of Russia, Moscow, Russia;2Federal Research Clinical
Center of Federal Medical and Biological Agency of Russia, Moscow,
Russia.
Aim
To evaluate the effect of PPARG2 Pro12Ala, TNFa G(308)A and G(238)A, LIPC
C(-514)T, ACE I/D, SLCO1B1 Val174Ala polymorphism on the response to
statins therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
Methods
We consecutively recruited patients with type 2 DM requiring lipid-lowering
therapy  according  to  current  guidelines.  Patients  were  started  on  either
atorvastatin 10 or 20 mg. After 12 month of statin therapy, patients had fasting
lipid profiles repeated. The alleles and genotypes were performed by PCR in real
time with the TaqMan probes. Statistic analysis was evaluated using the Mann-
Whitney/Kruskal-Wallis and Wilcoxon tests, P!0.05.
Results
Ninety-seven patients were studied. There was no difference in total cholesterol
(TC)  and  low-density  lipoprotein  cholesterol
(LDL-C)  levels  between  the
genotypes of studied genes in statin-untreated subjects. With statin therapy,
PPARG2Pro/Pro patients had significantly TC and LDL-C lowering compared
with PPARG2Pro/Ala and PPARG2 Ala/Ala patients (for TC: 20.74% vs. 4.6%
and 5.61%; PZ0.04, respectively; for LDL-C: 26.00% vs. 6.11% and 7.32%;
PZ0.029,  respectively).  There  was  no  gender  difference  in  baseline  lipid
parameters or response to statin therapy.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
PPARG2 Pro12Ala polymorphism accounts for interindividual variability of
response to statin therapy in patients with T2DM.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP541
EP542
Add on exenatide treatment in obese type 2 diabetic patients under
intensive insulin regiments
Alper Sonmez, Mustafa Dinc, Abdullah Taslipinar, Aydogan Aydogdu,
Coskun Meric, Yalcin Basaran, Cem Haymana, Orhan Demir & Omer Azal
Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Intensive insulin treatment in obese patients with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) is often
difficult. Insulin dosages are much higher, which further increase weight gain and
the risk of hypoglycemia. Glucagon like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RAs)
are the promising treatment modalities causing weight loss and reducing the risk
of hypoglycemia. There is no published data about the effect of adding on
GLP1RAs to obese T2DM patients with un-controlled glucose levels under
intensive insulin regiments.
Methods
This retrospective case series report the clinical outcomes of 23 obese patients
with uncontrolled T2DM (femaleZ18, ageZ59G10.44 years, BMI 41.12G6.77
years, HbA1c 9.92G1.52), under intensive insulin regiments. Patients were
treated with 10 micrograms exenatide twice daily for a mean follow-up period of
11.22G7.01 (3-30) months. Intensive insulin regiments were continued in 7
patients while the other 16 patients were switched to basal insulin during the
exenatide treatment. Metformin was the only anti-diabetic medicine taken by all
the patients, other than exenatide and insulin.
Results
During the follow-up period, the mean HbA1c levels of the patients were
significantly improved (PZ0.019) along with the significant decrease in BMI and
the reduction in the total insulin dosages (P!0.001 for both). The demographical
and clinical characteristics of the patients in the intensive and basal insulin group
were  similar,  other  than  the  baseline  insulin  dosages  before  the  exenatide
treatment,  which  was  significantly  higher  in  the  intensive  regiment  group
(PZ0.013). When the clinical improvements of the two groups were compared,
no significant difference was present between the alterations of HbA1c, BMI and
the reduction in total insulin dosages (PZ0.098, PZ0.617, PZ0.3 respectively).
Conclusion
According to the results of this retrospective case series, add on exenatide appears
to be an essential treatment alternative in obese T2DM patients without glycemic
regulation under intensive insulin regiments.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP542
EP543
The impact of insulin sensitisation with metformin on lung function in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Sanja Borozan, Zoja Stankovic & Irena Subaric
Clinical Centre of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro.
Introduction
Pathophysiologic mechanisms that connect type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are complex and still unknown
as are any respiratory effects of antidiabetic agents. COPD increases insulin
resistance by chronic inflammation, hypoxia and corticosteroid treatment while,
on the other hand, insulin as an anabolic hormone stimulates post-prandial protein
synthesis  and  oxidative  phosphorylation  in  skeletal  muscle  so  that  insulin
resistance seems to be an important factor in the development of skeletal muscle
weakness. We aimed to assess the influence of metformin treatment on lung
function and its potential clinical benefit considering the fact that, as oral insulin-
sensiting agent, increases respiratory muscle strenght.
Methodology
Retrospective study included patients with both T2DM and COPD who were
hospitalized for acute exacerbation of COPD defined following Anthonisen
criteria. COPD exacerbation was treated according to American Thoracic and
European Respiratory Society quidelines, T2DM with pre-existing antidiabetic
therapy. Spirometric parametres and lenght of hospital stay were compared
according to presence or absence of metformin. Unpaired t-test was used for
statistical analysis.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Results
Thirty-four patients were enrolled of whom 23 (67.6%) treated with metformin
(mean age 67.3G10.0 years; 52.2% males) and 11 (32.4%) with sulfonylureas
and/or insulin (mean age 68G7.7 years; 63.6% males). Patients in metformin
group had significantly better FEV1 (PZ0.007) and Tiffneau index (PZ0.017)
while the difference in FVC showed a considerable trend toward significance
(PZ0.063). Among these patients, single dose of metformin 500 mg turned out to
be sufficient for the beneficial effect on FEV1; further improvement in FEV1 with
increased dosage was insignificant (PO0.05). However, there was no significant
difference concerning length of stay among them: median 10.8 days in metformin
group vs 13.5 in non-metformin group (PZ0.129).
Conclusion
Treatment with metformin was associated with improvements in spirometric
examinations in patients with both T2DM and COPD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP543
EP544
Potential glycemic overtreatment in diabetics patients older than 70
years and comorbid conditions: real-life experience
Almudena Vicente, Mónica Olivar, Claudia Cortés, Ana Martínez,
Julia Sastre, Virginia Pen˜ a, Bárbara Cánovas & José López
Endocrinology Department, Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain.
Background
Optimal  glucose  management  in  older  people  is  currently  unclear.  Recent
guidelines recommend avoiding tight glycemic targets in elderly patients with
comorbidities because intensive control is unlikely to achieve benefit and they are
at higher risk of hypoglycaemia.
Objective
To estimate the prevalence of potential overtreatment in older adults with diabetes
mellitus and comorbidities.
Design
Cross-sectional study.
Patients and methods
The study included 293 type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients that were monitored
from 2004 to 2014. At the end of follow-up, 166 (56.7% of final cohort) patients
were older than 70 years (DM2: 95.2%; 69.3% female and long-standing diabetes,
26.6 years). Data about treatment, glycemic control, and comorbidities were
collected from clinical records of these patients.
Results
Sixty-eight patients (42.5%) had an HbA1c !7%. These patients had significant
advanced mean age (80.2 vs 78.4 years) (P!0.05). Their mean diabetes duration
was 25.5 years, most of them were female (70.6%) and almost half (47%) had
either macrovascular disease, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) less
than 60 ml/min/1.73 m2 (!60) or both.
Anti-diabetic therapy was insulin based in 58 (85%), sulfonylureas or glinide
based in 7 (10.8%) and combined both insulin and secretagogues in 4 (5.9%). In
insulin-treated patients, more than two-thirds (78%) were on intensified regimen.
Among patients with macrovascular disease, eGFR !60 or both, 21(61%) were
treated with intensified insulin regimen. Only one patient received secretagogues.
Conclusions
Our results indicate that nearly half of our elderly patients had a strict glycemic
control and the majority of them are being treated with intensified insulin
regimen, secretagogues or combination of both and therefore are potentially being
overtreated.
In all, more than half of these elderly patients with strict glycemic control and
comorbidities are being treated with intensified insulin therapy or secretagogues,
putting them at risk of adverse hypoglycemic events.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP544
EP545
Long-term effects of Stevia rebaduiana on glucose and lipid profile,
adipocytokines, markers of inflammation and oxidation status in
patients with metabolic syndrome
Eva Kassi, George Landis, Aikaterini Pavlaki, George Lambrou,
Aimilia Mantzou, Ioannis Androulakis, Andreas Giannakou,
Eleni Papanikolaou & George Chrousos
Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, University of Athens
Medical School, ‘Eugenideion’ Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a cluster of interconnected factors that directly
increase the risk of DM2 and CVD. Stevia rebaudiana (a low calorie natural
sweetener)  and  its  compounds  are  known  for  anti-hyperglycemic,  anti-
inflammatory, anti-oxidant, anti-hypertensive effects.
Methods
Thirty-eight patients (age 47.3G10.3 years) (nmalesZ14, nfemalesZ24) with MetS
(NCEP/ATPIII criteria) were included. MetS patients were following the same
low calorie diet and were randomly assigned to consume either a Stevia snack
(nZ19) four times/week (Stevia group) or a sweet of their choice (nZ19) once a
week (control group), for 4 months. BMI, W/H ratio, systolic and diastolic blood
pressure
(sBP, dBP) were measured before and after intervention. Glucose,
triglycerides, cholesterol (LDL, HDL), uric acid, renal and liver functions were
determined. Insulin was measured with CLIA, and HOMA-IR was calculated.
leptin, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI1), IL-6,ox-LDL, suPAR were
measured with ELISA, HbA1c in DCA BAYER analyzer and total oxidant status:
(Perox) photometrically.
Results
After 4 months dietary intervention, a decrease in BMI (PZ0.01) sBP (PZ0.02),
SGOT (PZ0.004), gGT (PZ0.035), alk.phospatase (PZ0.008) was observed in
the control group while Patients in the Stevia group presented significantly lower
levels  in  TCHOL
(PZ0.022),  SGOT
(P!0.001),  g-GT
(P!0.001),
ox-LDL(PZ0.016), BMI (P!0.001), sBP (P!0.001), dBP (P!0.001) and
W/H (PZ0.001). A marginally significant decrease in suPAR (PZ0.078), as well
as  in HbA1c (PZ0.07), LDL  (PZ0.072), and leptin (PZ0.071) was also
observed. Comparing the changes in serum values, BMI, W/H, BP and HOMA-IR
between the two groups over the 4 months period, patients in Stevia group
presented significantly lower levels of ox-LDL (PZ0.01) and sBP (PZ0.003)
and  marginally  significant  decrease  in  fasting  Glu
(PZ0.058) and leptin
(PZ0.054) compared to control group.
Conclusion
The introduction of low glycemic load snacks based on Stevia in a low calorie diet
in patients with MetS is safe and can lead to a further reduction in BP, fasting
glucose, ox-LDL and leptin compared to a hypocaloric diet alone.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP545
EP546
Evaluation of three continuous glucose monitoring systems during
exercise and meal challenges
Julia K Mader1, Martin Hajnsek2, Felix Aberer1, Markus Rumpler2,
Sabine Zenz1, Adelheid Puffing1, Hesham El-Sayed1, Petra Baumann2,
Frank Sinner2 & Thomas R Pieber1,2
1Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;2Joanneum Research Graz,
Graz, Austria.
Introduction
Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) has become an essential tool in diabetes
management. In order to use CGM for treatment decisions, CGM systems have to
be reliable over a wide range of glycemia as well as in situations with rapidly
changing glucose levels such as exercise or in the postprandial state.
Design
In this monocentric study we evaluated the performance of three commercially
available CGM systems (Abbott Libre, Dexcom G4 Platinum, Medtronic Enlite)
in 12 type 1 diabetic subjects (age 33G11 years, 42% women, BMI 22.5G
2.4 kg/m2, diabetes duration 17G12 years, HbA1c 7.6G1.1%) over a period of
12 h. Routine clinical conditions were mimicked by meal and exercise tests. The
sensors were inserted 24 h prior to the test in parallel and were calibrated
according to manufacturers’ instructions. Reference plasma glucose samples were
taken every 5 min throughout the study and measured with Super GL analyzer.
Glucose measurement accuracy was assessed by mean absolute relative difference
(MARD) for each CGM system overall, during exercise and postprandially.
Results
Overall MARD was 13.2G10.9% (Abbott), 16.8G12.3% (Dexcom) and 21.4G
17.6% (Medtronic). During exercise (ex) and postprandially (pp) MARD was as
follows: 8.7G5.9% (Abbott_ex), and 11.7G10.5% (Abbott_pp), 15.7G14.6%
(Dexcom_ex) and 15.1G12.5% (Dexcom_pp), and 19.4G13.5% (Medtronic_ex)
and 20.5G17.9% (Medtronic_pp), respectively.
Conclusion
Sensor  performance  was similar  during  the  whole  investigational period
compared to exercise or the postprandial state. The Abbott sensor showed
superior performance during all study phases. CGM might become an important
tool to avoid exercise-related hypoglycemia which needs to be proven in large-
scale studies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP546
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP547
The effects of vitamin D on advanced glycation end-products in
prediabetic and type 2 diabetic patients with vitamin D deficiency
Bahar Tekin1, F. Buket Bayram1 & Dilek Gogas Yavuz2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Marmara University Hospital, Marmara
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Internal
Medicine, Section of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Marmara University
Hospital, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Aim
There is strong evidence regarding vitamin D being a risk factor for Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM). In this study, we aimed to investigate the effects of
vitamin D on advanced glycation end-products in prediabetic and type 2 diabetic
patients with vitamin D deficiency.
Methods
Forty type 2 diabetic patients, 40 prediabetic patients and 40 healthy controls with
the levels of vitamin D !20 ng/ml were included in the study. All three groups
were given oral vitamin D 50 000 U/w as loading dose for 8 weeks and it was
tapered to maintenance dose to 1500 U/d. All three groups were evaluated with
pretreatment and 12th week measurements of height, weight, waist circumfer-
ence, systolic/diastolic blood pressures, advanced glycation end-products (AGE)
in skin, serum CML, fasting blood glucose, HbA1c, 25(OH) vitamin D, calcium,
phosphorus,  parathyroid  hormone
(PTH)  and  their  muscle  strengths  were
assessed.
Results
All three groups showed statistically significant increase in their serum 25(OH)
vitamin D levels (P!0.0001). Serun CML levels increased significantly in all
three groups (P!0.05). Skin AGE deposition was observed significantly higher in
diabetic group compared to healthy control group (P!0.05); however there was
no significant decrease in skin AGE levels in any of the groups after vitamin D
replacement (PO0.05). All three groups had statistically significant increase in
their muscle strength after treatment (P!0.0001).
Discussion
Vitamin D replacement increased serum vitamin D levels in all three groups;
however it did not result in significant decrease in glycemic parameters after a
3-month treatment. Serum CML levels significantly increased after treatment and
this increase was thought to be due to weight gain. This finding is the first in
literature. When AGE deposition in skin is considered a long-term effect, longer
periods of follow-up and serum AGE measurements may confirm the correlation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP547
EP548
Intensive therapy with insulin pump in type 1 diabetes mellitus
Inês Gouveia3, Celestino Neves1,3, Sofia Oliveira1,3, Joa˜o Sérgio Neves1,3
,
Cláudia Dias2 & Davide Carvalho1,3
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Porto, Portugal;
2Department of Health Information and Decision Sciences, Sa˜o João
Hospital Centre, Porto, Portugal;3Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal.
Background
Continuous  subcutaneous  insulin  infusion
(CSII),  alongside  multiple  daily
injections (MDI) are the most frequent therapeutic of type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
(DM). We aimed to evaluate the effects of the transition from MDI to CSII in the
treatment of type 1 DM.
Patients and methods
This retrospective longitudinal study analysed patients that received treatment
with CSII from 2006 to 2014. Our sample had 85 patients, 35 male (41.2%) and 50
female (58.8%) with ages between 19 and 77 years (mean age 37G11), and
duration of  disease of
15G9 years.  We  evaluated values such  as HbA1c,
serum glucose, lipid profile, creatinine, weekly frequency of hypoglycemias
(!70 mg/dl)  and  hyperglycemia
(O200 mg/dl)  as  well  the  presence  of
microvascular complications. The effects of CSII were compared according to
the following subgroups: HbA1c pre-CSII (%7.0% vs O7.0%); age (%35 years
vs O35 years); sex distribution; duration of disease (%15 years vs O15 years);
presence of microvascular complications. The statistical analysis was made
recurring  to  Wilcoxon and  Mann-Whitney  tests.  The  results  presented  are
meansGS.D.,  median  and  percentages.  A  bilateral  value  of  P!0.05
was
considered statistically significant.
Results
We observed a decrease in the weekly frequency of hypoglycemias [3.0(1.5,
K6.0)  vs
2.0(1.0,K3.9);PZ0.001]  and  hyperglycemias
[5.5(3.0,K7.0)  vs
2.5(1.8,K4.5); P!0.001]. Comparing patients with HbA1c pre-CSII%7 and
O7.0%, the latter group had a significant reduction of HbA1c [K0.40(K0.90.0)
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
vs 0.25(K0.45,K0.80); PZ0.002] after 6 months. No statistical difference was
found on the subgroups of age, sex, duration of disease and microvascular
complication. Serum glucose and HbA1c values on patients with HbA1c pre-
ISCI%7.0% had also no statistical difference.
Conclusions
The CSII therapy is more effective than MDI as demonstrated by the significant
reduction of  hypoglycemia and  hyperglycemia  episodes.  We  also  observed
benefits in the reduction of HbA1c with the CSII treatment in the HbA1cO7.0%
subgroup, which had the worst metabolic control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP548
EP549
Potential use of embryonic antitumor modulator (EATM) for diabetes
prevention and treatment
Yelena Aghajanova & Lilit Mkrtchyan
Yerevan State Medical University, Yerevan, Armenia.
Introduction
Incidence of diabetes mellitus worldwide is on the rise, and better methods of
prevention and treatment are needed. We evaluated the possible antidiabetic
effect of embryonic antitumor modulator (EATM) created by Mkrtchyan, which
reportedly exhibit anticancer, neuroprotective and immunomodulatory properties.
Materials and methods
Rats with streptozotocin
(STZ)-induced diabetes
(55 mg/kg once i.p.) were
injected EATM (1 mg/200 g rat body mass once i.p.) in preventive mode and in
therapeutic mode. The activity of cortisol, prolactin, IL-4, K6, K8 in the serum,
as well as releasing of NAPDH-oxidase in erythrocyte membranes and exosomes
of  blood  serum  were  studied.  For  morphological  analysis  pieces  from  the
pancreas, liver, kidney and heart were stained with hematoxylin-eosin, aldehyde-
fuchsin or Azur II-eosin.
Results
The activity of serum cortisol, prolactin, IL-4, K6, K8, as well as releasing of
NAPDH-oxidase  in erythrocyte membranes and exosomes  in blood  largely
normalized in treated compared to untreated STZ animals. Compared to control
animals (Group 1), there was a 4-fold decline in the number of pancreatic b-cells
in STZ rats (Group 2), while preventive injection of EATM (Group 3) animals
showed significantly smaller decrease in b-cells, with levels being higher than in
Group 2. In the EATM-treatment group (Group 4) the number of b-cells was the
highest among the treatment groups (PO0.05), and was just 1.4-fold lower than
those of control Group 1.
Conclusion
In rats with STZ-induced diabetes both preventive and therapeutic mode of
EATM injection revealed definite protective effect. The normalization of studied
biochemical, immunological and morphological indices was observed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP549
EP550
Effects in weight loss and HbA1c after one year of use of dapaglifozina
Lidia Urbón López de Linares, Maria Cristina Crespo Soto,
Concepción Terroba, Marta Ventosa, Tomás Martín, Maria del Mar Calleja
& Luis Angel Cuellar
Hospital Universitario Rio Hortega, Valladolid, Spain.
Changes in HbA1c and weight after 1 year on dapaglifozina added to the previous
treatment.
SGLT2 inhibitors are becoming a common and useful drug to treat type 2
diabetes.
The inhibition of the sodium-glucose co transporters (SLGT2) inhibits also the
glucose reabsorption in the proximale tubule and increases the glucose excreted in
the urine.
Therefore hyperglycemia decreases and so does weight as happens with the
glycosuria. This is a very convenient side effect since type 2 DM is highly
associated with overweight/obesity.
We show the results of HbA1c and weight evolution after starting dapaglifozina
added to the previous treatment. We evaluate 46 patients; the medium age was
58G8 years. Males represent the 47%.
Initial medium HbA1c 7.9%G1 and medium weight 90G16 kg. After 3 months
medium HbA1c was 7.4%G0.7 and weight 87G16.4 kg. After 6 months the
medium HbA1c was 7.26%G0.7 and weight 88.2G17 kg. Twenty of those
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
patients were controlled after 1 year, the medium HbA1c was 7.37%G0.86 and
medium weight was 87.6G19 kg (initial parameters for this group were HbA1c
8.1%G1.2 and weight 92.4G20 kg).
Uric acid levels were assessed, basal medium levels were 5.25G1.6 mg/dl after 3
months decreased a medium of 0.32 mg/dl (4.9G1.1 mg/dl) in 24 patients. A
decreased of 1 mg/dl after 6 months was verified in 11 patients.
Three female patients suffered urinary infection during the first 3 months, only
one of them had to stop the therapy. No other adverse effects were observed.
Conclusions
Dapagliflozina is an useful drug for treating type 2 diabetes.
In addition, most of the patients get a lost of weight.
A decrease in serum uric acid levels was observed.
The most common side effect was non complicated urinary infection in the first 3
months that was solved with antibiotic therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP550
EP551
An assessment of factors related with understanding education and
knowledge of self-care among patients with diabetes mellitus: a cross
sectional prospective study in two cities of Turkey
Oguzhan S Dizdar1, Ozen Oz Gul2, Osman Baspinar1, Pinar Sisman2,
Soner Cander2 & Canan Ersoy2
1Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Training and
Research Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey;2Uludag University Medical School,
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey.
Background
The prevalence of the diabetes mellitus is rapidly increasing particularly in
developing countries. For effective management of diabetes, patients must be
actively involved in their care. The aim of the study was to assess the knowledge
and self-care practices and contribution of the education to this knowledge level
and glycemic control.
Material methods
We formed patients groups consisting of 15 to 30 diabetic patients. Firstly,
patients surveyed diabetes self-care knowledge questionnaire (DSCKQ-30).).
Later, a standard power point presentation about diabetes self-management was
made to patients. Then, patients surveyed DSCKQ-30 again. All patients were
invited to hospital to measure control HBA1c level 3 months later.
Results
Of the total 364 participants 62.9% (nZ229) were females. Significant increase in
percent of correct response was determined in all components between before and
after education. There was a significant decline of 1.1 in HBA1c levels after 3
months of education (P!0.001). Married or active working patients had better
understand the educations of diabetes and had higher knowledge of self-care
management regardless of the level of education or income.
Conclusion
Education  of  diabetes  can  significantly  improve  knowledge  of  self-care
management and can help achieving glycaemic control. Continuing education
on  self-care  management  and  complications  is  crucial  and  this  should  be
accompanied by a regular assessment of their diabetic knowledge.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP551
EP552
Associated antidiabetic treatment in a rural population with type 2
diabetes mellitus
2
Jose Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1 & Carmen Maria Cortes-Salazar
1Endocrinology Department, Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital,
Malaga, Spain;2Badolatosa Primary Care Centre, Seville, Spain.
Objectives
To evaluate the characteristics of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
attended in a rural primary care setting and to analyze associated antidiabetic
treatment and metabolic control.
Methods
Cross-sectional study which included patients with T2DM followed in a rural
primary care setting. Data about age, sex, body mass index (BMI), associated
antidiabetic treatment, and HbA1c was collected.
Results
Seventy nine patients were included in this study, with a mean duration of T2DM
of 5.9 years (S.D. 5), mean age 70.1 years (DE 11.8), 63.3% males, and mean BMI
30.8 kg/m2 (DE 5.7). 100% of patients were under antidiabetic treatment: oral
antidiabetic drugs (OADs) 74.7%, OADs C insulin 20.3%, insulin alone 5%.
Mean number of OADS was 1.3 (65.4% monotherapy, double therapy 28%, triple
therapy
6.6%). Most used drugs were metformin (85.3%), DPP4 inhibitors
(29.3%) and sulfonilureas (20%). Most used insulin therapy was basal insulin C
rapid-acting insulin (55%), followed by basal alone (35) and pre-mixed insulins
(10%). Mean insulin dose was 62.3 units (DE 37.1) and mean HbA1c value was
6.8% (DE 0.9). 61% of patients showed adequate metabolic control (defined by
HbA1c !7%).
Conclusions
Most patients with T2DM in a rural setting are obese elderly men. Antidiabetic
therapy is usually based on oral drugs, being metformin the commonest drug.
Metabolic control was adequate in this group of patients, achieving more than
60% of patients HbA1c !7%.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP552
EP553
Abstract withdrawn.
EP554
Economic impact on the use of insulin pumps in diabetes type I -
analysis on Portuguese real life results
Ines Joaquim1, Joana Vilaverde2, Luísa Barros3, Isabel Diniz3,
Filipa Sabino4, José Manuel Boavida4 & Helena Cardoso2
1Portugal, Lisbon, Portugal;2Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Oporto, Portugal;
3Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal;
4Direcção Geral de Saúde, Lisbon, Portugal.
Although, diabetes type I patients in Portugal have complete and free access to
HbA1c management (via multiple daily injections) only a few percentage has
been provided an insulin pump - priority is given to children and women in fertile
age trying to get pregnant. By the end of 2014, 1.150 insulin pumps had already
been provided by the National Program of Insulin Pumps, but at least 3.000
patients with indication for insulin pump use were in waiting list. HbA1c pre-
pump as well as number of hypoglycaemias and ketoacidosis events have been
registered in a database for those patients that were provided an insulin pump.
Annual control medical appointments fed this database with post-pump results.
Analysis  on  these  results  showed  important  reductions  on  the  number  of
hypoglycaemias  and  ketoacidosis  events  per  patient-year
(hypo:  K1.54;
ketoacidosis: K0.05) and a reduction of average HbA1c of these patients by
1%. Collecting Portuguese costs on hypoglycaemia events, ketoacidosis events
and  main chronic  diseases  related  to diabetes enabled  the analysis  on the
economic impact of the use of insulin pumps on Portuguese patients in a real life
setting. Results show that in the short-term, it is expected annual savings of
3.336V per patient driven by the reduction of acute events. In the long-term, the
reduction of the HbA1c significantly reduces the risk of developing chronic
diseases saving around 25.553V per patient. A total of 125.639V per patient can
be saved during 30 years of using an insulin pump. An investment up to 3.585V
per patient per year is possible and justifies the use of insulin pumps given the
potential savings per patient that are estimated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP554
EP555
Effects of GLP-1 analogues in the treatment of a population with DM2
Catarina Ivo, João Nunes e Silva, Hélder Simo˜ es, Luis Lopes,
Dolores Passos, Mafalda Marcelino & João Jácome de Castro
Hospital das Forc¸as Armadas, Lisboa, Portugal.
The  analogues  of  GLP-1(aGLP1)  are  a  new  class  of  anti-diabetic  agents,
administered subcutaneously for the treatment of Diabetes Mellitus type 2 (DM2).
In the Portuguese market, there are two aGLP1 currently available: Liraglutide
(once-daily administration) and Exenatide (once-weekly administration). They
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
mimic the GLP-1, produced in the small intestine, stimulated by foods at this
region, increasing the production of insulin, decreasing the satiety and slowing
gastric emptying.
Objectives
Impact assessment of aGLP1 in patients with DM2 followed in the consultation of
Diabetes.
Methods
Retrospective study of patients with DM2 followed in consultation, using aGLP1,
since January 2014 to December 2015. Were evaluated: demographic data, the
anti-diabetic medication used before the introduction of the drug, metabolic
control and the weight on the 0, 3 and 6 months(M). Data were analysed
according to descriptive statistical methods.
Results
Were observed 80 patients, 65% male, with average of 58.4G9.4 years. The
initial mean HbA1c was 8.0% (5.1-11.6) and the average initial weight was
109.9 Kg (between 72 and 132). 76.9% of patients were under non-insulin anti-
diabetics (NIA), 12.8% under NIAClong-acting insulin, 10.3% under NIAC
long-acting insulinCrapid-acting insulin. In 13.3% it was the first therapeutic
choice. In
31.4% was done an exchange of pharmacological class and the
remaining therapeutic add-on. 12.8% abandoned therapy by gastro-intestinal side
effects. The HbA1c to 3 M reduced on average K0.84% (K3.0 and C1.7),
however in 15% there was an increase and 6 M a mean variation of K1.3% (K3.8
to C2.5). The weight reduced on average K2.98 kg (K15 to 0) to 3 M, no
increased weight and 10% remained weight, and reduced K5.1 kg (K16 to C2)
at 6 M.
Conclusions
Patients with DM2 medicated with aGLP1 presented benefits at the level of
HbA1c and the weight up to 6 months. The extension of this analysis will assess
the long-term results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP555
EP556
Effects of SGLT2 inhibitors in the treatment of a population with type 2
diabetes mellitus
João Silva, Catarina Ivo, Dolores Passos, Helder Simoes, Luis Lopes,
Mafalda Marcelino & João Jácome de Castro
Portuguese Armed Forces University Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
The  SGLT-2  inhibitors
(InibSGLT2)  are  the  newest  class  of  non-insulin
antidiabetic  drugs
(ANI)  for  type
2
diabetes  mellitus
(T2DM)  treatment.
Currently is only available in Portugal, dapagliflozin. This pharmacological
class have shown benefits in metabolic control (reduction of 0.5-0.8% HbA1c)
and in weight loss (1-3 kg).
Objective
Evaluate the impact of InibSGLT2 in patients with T2DM followed in a Diabetes
department.
Methods
Retrospective study of patients with T2DM followed in clinic, treated with
Dapagliflozin  since  December
2014
to  December
2015.  We  evaluated
demographic data, antidiabetic medication used prior to Dapagliflozin introduc-
tion, metabolic control and weight at 0, 3 and 6 months. Data analyzed by
methods of descriptive statistics.
Results
We observed 78 patients, 64.1% male, mean age 64G10 years. Average initial
HbA1c was 8.1% (6.5-11.7%) and initial weight was 92.7 kg (72-122 kg). 72.9%
were exclusively treated with ANI and 27.1% with insulin therapy. Of patients
treated exclusively with ANI, 14.8% were treated with 1 ANI, 40.7% with 2 ANI,
37.0%  with
3
ANI  and  7.4%  with  4  ANI.  There  was  an  exchange  in
pharmacological classes in 13.5% of patients while others had an add-on therapy.
10.9% of patients abandoned therapy, 75% because of genital-urinary complaints.
28.2% have no reassessment after introduction of Dapagliflozin, 53.8% after 3
months and 10.3% after 6 months. After 3 months there was a decreased in HbA1c
of 0.57% (K2.1%;C1.2%), with 21.8% patients having an increase in HbA1c.
At 6 months, there was an average reduction of 0.25% (K0.8;C0.3%). Weight
reduction at 3 months was on average K1.99 kg (K6;C1), of which 14.8% had
increased weight. At 6 months, there was an average reduction of K5.2 kg
(K10;K0.4).
Conclusions
We conclude that patients with DM2 treated with InibSGLT2 obtained benefits
especially in weight loss and metabolic control immediately. The extension of this
analysis will assess long-term results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP556
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP557
Randomized clinical trial to compare the effects of glargine multidosis
versus CSII therapy on metabolic and oxidative stress parameters in
people with type 1 diabetes
M Soledad Ruiz de Adana Navas, Marta Domínguez-López,
Eleazara Rubio, Natalia Colomo Rodriguez, Isabel Cardona, M José Tapia,
Virgina Morillas, Inmaculada Gonzlez & Gemma Rojo
Hospital Regional Universitario, Málaga, Spain.
Aims
There are few data comparing oxidative stress markers in CSII versus MDI/G We
compared after randomization CSII (Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion)
vs MDI/G therapy (multiple doses of insulin with glargine) in DM1 people
previously optimized  at MDI/G being the primary  objective assessment  of
metabolic control and oxidative stress.
Assess oxidative stress and metabolic control in patients with type 1 diabetes
(T1D) after randomization in CSII (continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion)
therapy vs MDI/G (multiple daily injections with glargine) previously optimized
MDI/G.
Materials and methods
Thirty eight patients (29.8G8.5 years) with type 1 diabetes T1D of long duration
(13G7 years), HbA1c 8.4G1.2%, treated with MDI/NPH, were intensified for
6 months at MDI/G and then randomized to MDI/G vs CSII, both with Lispro for
rapid analogue, and reviewed monthly during six months. At the end of each
phase, metabolic control variables and total antioxidant capacity (TAC) (EIA,
Cayman Chemical) were evaluated. Glycemic control was assessed by HbA1c,
data derived from the MCG for 72 h CGMSw (Medtronic), rate of mild and
severe hypoglycemia, and ketoacidosis.
Results
At 6 months of treatment with MDI/G (nZ38), with a larger number of self-test
(PZ0.001), total insulin daily dose
(PZ0.04), HbA1c (PZ0.02), glycemic
variability (PZ0.04), number of severe hypoglycemia episodes (PZ0.01), and
TAC (2.3G1.2 vs 1.3G0.5 mM; PZ0.001) decreased while time in normogly-
caemia (P!0.05) and BMI (PZ0.01) increased.
After 6 months of randomization, TAC and HbA1c improved significantly only in
the CSII group reaching at the end of the study better levels than in the MDI/G
group (TAC: MDI/G 1.48G0.84 vs CSII1.94G0.58; PZ0.03; HbA1c: MDI/G
7.6G0.9
vs  ISCI
7G0.6%;PZ0.006).  No  correlations  between  TAC  and
variables studied were appreciated.
Conclusions
This randomized study shows that in patients with DM1 previously optimised,
CSII therapy may provide additional benefits in HbA1c and oxidative stress
markers versus MDI/G. Studies with larger sample size and other oxidation
markers must confirm these findings.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP557
EP558
Dapagliflozin clinical experience and safety on patients with type 2
diabetes and obesity
María del Mar Roca-Rodríguez1, María José Picón-César2, Antonio
Jesús Omiste-Romero2, Jorge García-Pérez1 & Manuel Aguilar-Diosdado3
1Department of Endocrinology, La Linea de la Concepcion Hospital, Cadiz,
Spain;2Department of Endocrinology, Virgen de la Victoria and Regional
Hospitals, Malaga, Spain;3Department of Endocrinology, Puerta del Mar
Hospital, Cadiz, Spain.
Introduction
New treatments of diabetes, such as dapagliflozin, improve global metabolic
status beyond glycemic control.
Aim
To evaluate tolerance to dapagliflozin and its effects on metabolic control in type
2 diabetes and obese patients attended in endocrinology offices.
Material and method
A prospective study of patients with type 2 diabetes and obesity. In an intra-
subject analysis, clinical and analytical data were evaluated at baseline and after
dapagliflozin treatment.
Results
We studied 38 patients (47.4% women) with type 2 diabetes and obesity. Average
age was 55.7G1.5 years, average duration of diabetes was 10.7G1.7 years and
40.9 and 91.3% had family history of cardiovascular disease and diabetes,
respectively. At baseline, 78.9% of the patients had metformin, 39.5% others oral
hypoglycemic agents, 13.2% glp-1 agonists and 44.7% insulin. We re-evaluated
the  patients
3.9G0.2 months  after  treatment  with  dapagliflozin.  We  found
significant improvements in weight (P!0.001), bmi (P!0.001), sbp (PZ0.008),
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
dbp
(PZ0.030),  fasting  glucose
(PZ0.001),  hba1c
(P!0.001),  total-chol
(PZ0.011),  ldl-chol
(PZ0.038)  tg  (PZ0.025),  gpt
(PZ0.032),  and  lipids
drugs (P!0.001). No changes in levels of creatinine and glomerular filtration rate
were  observed.  Regarding  tolerance  to  dapagliflozin,  only
7.9%  developed
urinary tract infections.
Conclusions
Significant improvement of anthropometric parameters and glycemic control in
terms of fasting glucose and hba1c, and significant improvements of blood
pressure, gpt and lipid profile were observed. Only 7.9% developed urinary tract
infections. In addition, we found a significant intensification of lipid-lowering
therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP558
EP559
Lixisenatide effects on liver function, lipids and blood pressure levels
María del Mar Roca-Rodríguez1, Gonzalo Piédrola-Maroto2, María Teresa
Muros de Fuentes2, Miguel Quesada-Charneco3, Silvia Maraver-Selfa4,
M José Tapia-Guerrero4, Daniel Cepero-García5, Rosa Ordun˜ a-Espinosa3,
Joaquín Pechuán-Asensio6, Elena Ferrándiz-Millón5, Purificación Galera-
Martínez2, Mercedes Vázquez-Gutiérrez5 & Isabel Mancha-Doblas4
1Department of Endocrinology, La Linea Hospital, Cadiz, Spain;
2Department of Endocrinology, Virgen de las Nieves Hospital, Granada,
Spain;3Department of Endocrinology, San Cecilio Hospital, Granada,
Spain;4Department of Endocrinology, Virgen de la Victoria and Regional
Hospitals, Malaga, Spain;5Department of Endocrinology, Torrecardenas
Hospital, Almeria, Spain;6Endocrinology private office, Granada, Spain.
Introduction
New diabetes treatments, such as lixisenatide, improve global metabolic status
beyond glycemic control.
Aim
To evaluate lixisenatide effects on liver function, lipids and blood pressure levels
in type 2 diabetes and obese patients attended in endocrinology offices.
Material and method
This is a prospective study with a sample of 106 patients with type 2 diabetes and
obesity. In an intra-subject analysis, clinical and analytical data were evaluated at
baseline and after lixisenatide treatment.
Results
We studied 106 patients (51.9% women) with type 2 diabetes and obesity.
Average age was 57.9G1.1 years and average duration of diabetes was 11.1G0.7
years. At baseline, 66% of the patients used insulin. We re-evaluated the patients
3.8G0.2
months  after  treatment  with  lixisenatide.  We  found  significant
improvements  in  weight
(P!0.001),  bmi
(P!0.001),  wc  (PZ0.002),  sbp
(P!0.001), dbp (PZ0.001), fasting glucose (P!0.001), hba1c (P!0.001),
total-chol (P!0.001), ldl-chol (PZ0.040) tg (PZ0.047), got (PZ0.022), insulin
units (PZ0.045), hypertension drugs (P!0.001), and lipids drugs (P!0.001).
Bp and lipids improvements were still significant in the hypertension and lipid
treated subgroups (sbp, PZ0.001; dbp, PZ0.005; total-chol, P!0.001, ldl-chol,
PZ0.013 and tg PZ0.014), while only the decrease of sbp (PZ0.036) remained
significant in the subgroup of patients without hypertension or lipid-lowering
therapy.
Conclusions
1) We found significant improvement of anthropometric parameters and glycemic
control in terms of fasting glucose and hba1c. 2) Significant decrease of bp, got
and lipid profile and less insulin requirements were observed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP559
EP560
Predictive factors in the management and the prognosis of Korean
women with gestational diabetes mellitus
Min Jeong Kwon1,2, Seoyoung Hong2, Younju Kwon2, Yonghee Kwon2,
Seonhung Kim2, Hyunjun Kim2, Yunje Lee2, Taekyoon Kim1,2,
Soonhee Lee1,2 & Jeon Hyun Park1,2
1Busanpaik Hospital, College of Medicine, Inje University, Busan, Republic
of Korea;2College of Medicine, Inje University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
Introduction
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) of increasing prevalence, lacks factors
known to predict the prognosis of GDM. The correlations between levels of Oral
Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) and BMI before pregnancy and the clinical
progress of GDM were evaluated.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
Data of pregnant women diagnosed as GDM in Busanpaik hospital from January
1, 2010 to February 28, 2015 were studied. Correlations between patients’ OGTT
in gestational age 24-28 weeks, BMI before pregnancy, and the prognosis of
GDM (insulin usage and dose, postpartum 75-g OGTT, neonatal APGAR) were
analyzed.
Results
Among 97 patients, 35% required insulin treatment. Initial OGTT had profound
effect on prognosis of GDM and complications of the pregnant woman and the
fetus. One-hour 50-g OGTT (value: O165.5 mg/dl, sensitivity: 0.840, specificity:
0.420) and 2-h 100-g OGTT (value: O171.5 mg/dl, sensitivity: 0.800, specificity:
0.380) showed affinitive correlations with insulin usage. 75-g OGTT result after
delivery in the group that used insulin therapy was significantly higher compared
to the group that controlled by just diet modification, all in fasting, after 1-h, and
2-h test. Especially, fasting glucose levels showed affinitive correlation with the
usage of insulin (PZ0.043). For neonatal health, one and two hour 100-g OGTT
showed meaningful correlation with 1 min APGAR score (PZ0.042, PZ0.010),
especially 2-h OGTT showing affinitive correlation with 5 minute APGAR score
(PZ0.010). Unlike OGTT, BMI showed no consequential correlation.
Conclusion
Initial 50- and 100-g OGTT are factors legitimate for prediction of prognosis of
GDM such as need of insulin treatment and mother and fetal complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP560
EP561
Non-surgical reversal of type 2 diabetes mellitus
Abbi Lulsegged
Kings College Hospitals, London, UK.
A 44-year-old woman with a history of Bartters syndrome wanted a second
opinion. Her height was 1.54 m, weight 69 kg, waist circumference 102 cm, BP
112/74. A OGTT was arranged because of her waist circumference. Fasting
glucose 8.9 mmol/l, 2-hour glucose 20.2 mmol/l, HbA1c 7.9% consistent with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. She started taking metformin. However she was keen to
pursue lifestyle driven reversal of type 2 diabetes and so a low carbohydrate diet
was recommended restricting carbohydrates to !20 g a day.
At 4 weeks follow up she weighed 66.9 kg and her periods became regular. At
3 months her weight was 61.3 kg and waist circumference 88 cm. 6 months later
her  weight was 57 kg and waist circumference  86 cm. She stopped taking
metformin. 4 years later she had managed to maintain her weight and repeat oral
glucose tolerance test showed a fasting glucose of 5.8 mmol/l, two-hour glucose
7.6 mmol/L, HbA1c 4.8% or 29 mmol/mol.
This case illustrates the utility of a low carbohydrate; high fat
(LCHF) or
ketogenic  diet  in  promoting  reversal  of  type
2
diabetes  especially  when
implemented soon after the diagnosis is made. LCHF diets have been shown to
be highly effective at reducing weight, triglycerides and elevating HDL-C. They
significantly reduce hepatic glucose output and inflammation associated with
insulin resistance. In one study, 95.2% of patients on a ketogenic diet reduced or
stopped anti-diabetic medications compared to 62% following a low glycaemic
index diet. The potential to prevent progression in the disease process is not only
extremely beneficial for long term health but to do so in a way that could also
prevent a significant number of other co-morbidities associated with insulin
resistance  such  as  non-alcoholic  fatty  liver  disease,  hypertension  and
cardiovascular disease risk factors while reducing dependence on pharmaceutical
agents is highly attractive and cost-effective.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP561
EP562
Insulin pump therapy-a different solution for treating diabetes type I
Sladana Pejakovi
´1, Dragan Tešić1,2, Edita Stoki
´1,2,
Andrijana Milankov1,2, Jovana Prodanovi
´1, Ivanka Per
ˇi
´2,3,
Milena Mitrovi
´1,2 & Branka Kovačev-Zaviši
´1,2
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Diseases of Metabolism, Clinical
Center of Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia;2Medical Faculty, University Novi
Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia;3Emergency Center, Clinical Center of Vojvodina,
Novi Sad, Serbia.
Introduction and aim
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion via insulin pump is the most efficient
way of imitating physiological insulin secretion, and it also provides better
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
management of diabetes, lower rate of hypoglicemic episodes, better quality of
life and prevention of long-term complications of diabetes mellitus. Aim of the
research was to determine effects of subcutaneous insulin infusion therapy on
parameters of glycoregulation during the two years trial.
Material and methods
Research was conducted at Clinic for endocrinology, diabetes and diseases of
metabolism, Clinical center of Vojvodina, where 80 patients were treated this way
during period of time from 2007 to 2015. There are complete results assembled
for 60 patients with type I diabetes, from that 45 women, average age 31.67C8.03
and 15 men average age 26.06C8.25 years. In all subjects following parameters
were  monitored:  sex,  age,  medical  indications  for  this  kind  of  therapy,
complications of therapy, HbA1c in the moment of insulin pump application,
after 6 months, 1 and 2 years of therapy.
Results
After starting with insulin pump therapy, better glycoregulation was notified,
through statistically significant decrease in HbA1c rates after
6,
12 and 24
months. The biggest decrease in HbA1c rate was in those patients who had poorly
regulated diabetes with HbA1c O10% in the moment of insulin pump application
(usually former pediatric patients).
Conclusion
There is significant decrease in HbA1c rate after application of the insulin pump,
and it is also confirmed that the biggest reduction in HbA1c rate (2-3%) was in
those patients who had the worst glycoregulation (HbA1c O10%). Reduction of
HbA1c did not result in higher rates of hypoglicemic episodes, while ketoacidosis
was developed in two patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP562
EP563
Make sense of insulin
Ana Delia Santana Suárez, Sara Quintana Arroyo, Carmen Acosta Calero,
Claudia Arnás León & Francisco Javier Martínez Martín
Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran
Canaria, Spain.
Background
Insulin-related peptides are found in Cnidaria (the most ancient animals with
differentiated tissues including a nervous system, dating from 600 million years
ago) and their nucleotide sequence has been highly preserved ever since. In
mammals the binding of insulin to its receptor causes a cascade of actions, the
main one being translocation of GLUT4 glucose transporters to the plasma
membrane allowing influx of glucose into the adipose and striated muscle cells.
But  the  fact  that  glucose  can  freely  enter  most  other  tissues
(via  non-
insulindependent glucose transporters) and that in non-chordates the glucose
influx is unrelated to insulin raises the question: Why did fat and muscle need to
have GLUT4 and therefore insulin dependency? Better yet, what is the sense of
having insulin?
Methods
Review of the literature with emphasis in insulin phylogeny.
Findings
The  familiar  glucocentric  functions  of  insulin  appear  with  protochordates;
however insulinrelated peptides play an essential role in invertebrates activating
growth, differentiation, metamorphosis, sexual activity and in general regulating
the allocation of energy resources. In the well-studied nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans the presence of nutrients releases an insulin-like peptide that activates
metabolic and reproductive developments and shortens the lifespan, while the
lack of this peptide triggers a long-lasting dormant state (dauer).
Conclusions
The insulin receptor and insulin are lock and key. But having a lock and key in a
door only makes sense if sometimes we need to close it. We need insulin, not to
allow glucose influx in muscle and fat (in the postprandial state), but in order to be
able to close it (in the fasting state) saving glucose for non-dependent tissues.
Therefore insulin is the main switch between the anabolic and the catabolic state.
This function predates allowing glucose influx by hundreds of millions of years
and is well preserved along the evolutionary tree.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP563
EP564
GLP-1-RAs treatment in type 2 diabetes and obesity patients
Jose Alvaro Romero Porcel, Eyvee Arturo Cuellar Lloclla, Guillermo
Martinez de Pinillos Gordillo, Fernando Garcia Perez, Mariola
Mendez Muros, Jose Ignacio Fernández Pen˜ a, Mariana Tome Fernandez-
Ladreda, Juan Manuel Garcia de Quiros, Jose Ignacio Fernandez Lopez &
Maria Victoria Cozar Leon
Hospital Universitario de Valme, Seville, Spain.
Introduction
Assessing the effect of GLP 1 receptor agonist on metabolic control and weight
loss in obesity and type 2 diabetes patients.
Description of methods
A retrospective descriptive study involving type 2 diabetes patients and BMI
O30 kg/m2, who started treatment with GLP-1-RAs during the years 2012-2014.
Variables analyzed: weight and HbA1c at the begging, 6 months, 1 and 2 years;
regimen at baseline and after GLP-1-RAs; incidence of withdrawal of treatment.
Results
125 patients were included (mean age 55.4G9.7 years old; male 58.4%). GLP-1
agonists: exenatide
24.8%, liraglutide
57.6%, 17.6% lixisenatide. HbA1c at
baseline: 8.9G1.37%; HbA1c 6 months: 7.7%G1.3; HbA1c 1 year: 7.3%G1.4;
HbA1c 2 years: 7.3%G1.3. Start weight: 16.4G106.4 kg; 6 months weight:
101.6G16.5 kg; 1 year weight: 15.7G98.4 kg; 2 years weight: 15.5G97.4 kg.
The difference in HbA1c and weight at baseline and 6 months, 1 year and 2 years
follow-up  statistically  significant
(P!0.001),  not  statistically  significant
difference the first and second years of therapy. 56.8% patients were treated
with insulin at start. After addition GLP-1-RAs insulin treatment was finished by
9.9% (45.2% basal bolus therapy who changed baseline insuline and OADs).
Therapy discontinued in 25.6% (68.8% in the first-year), the main reason was
non-response (75%).
Conclusions
GLP-1 agonist inclusion in type 2 diabetes therapy improves glycemic blood
control and loss weight. Improvement already 6 months and holding the first and
second year. Treatment helped simplified insulinize, which is reflected in that
almost half of those doing intensive treatment could suspend insulin. However,
the number of patients we found in whom the treatment brought no improvement
was significant, been observed early non-response.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP564
EP565
The effect of diabetes on the duration and cost of treatment in patients
with acute ischemic stroke
Baburhan Guldiken1, Merve Namli1, Burak Celik1, Mehmet Celik2,
Buket Yilmaz Bulbul2 & Sibel Guldiken2
1Department of Neurology, Trakya University Medical Faculty, Edirne,
Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology,
Trakya University Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey.
Diabetes is an important risk factor for ischemic stroke. Hyperglycemia observed
in acute ischemic stroke is accepted as a poor prognostic factor. In the present
study, our aim is to investigate the effect of diabetes on the duration and cost of
treatment in acute ischemic stroke.
Three hundred sixty two acute ischemic stroke patients that were hospitalized in
the university neurology clinic in 2015 were retrospectively evaluated. Patients
that have diabetes (nZ112) were compared with the non-diabetics in respect to
the duration and cost of hospitalization.
There were no significant difference among the age, gender and other vascular
risk factors of both groups. We also found no difference between the duration
(12.5G7.7, 10.9G7.2 days, respectively) and cost of hospitalization (743.5G
588.2, 689.2G657.2 V, respectively).
The co-existence of diabetes does not bring additional load to the treatment cost
of  acute  ischemic  stroke  that  has  self-high  hospitalization  costs  due  to
theincreased mortality and morbidity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP565
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP566
Quality of life domains are affected in caregivers of people with type 2
diabetes: results from a literature review
Michele Miranda1 & Sofia Llahana1,2
1University College London Hospital - NHS Foundation Trust, London,
UK;2University College London, London, UK.
Background/aims
Caregivers play a crucial role in self-management of long-term conditions. The
aim of this literature review was to explore the impact that Type 2 diabetes has on
the caregivers’ quality of life (QoL) and its significance in integrated healthcare.
Methods
A search was undertaken in CINAHL, MEDLINE, BNI and ASSIA using
combinations of the following keywords limited to adults, humans and published
in English in the last 10 years: 1: carer, caregiver, family, ‘next of kin’, spouse*,
partner, proxy; 2: ‘type 2 diabetes’; 3: ‘quality of life’, QoL, ‘health related
quality of life’, ‘mental quality of life’ and ‘physical quality of life’. Inclusion
criteria were articles that explored aspects inherent to caregivers’ QoL and five
articles were found and analysed using critical analysis/thematic analysis.
Results
Caregivers QoL domains are affected by type 2 diabetes and overall impact is
found to vary: for some it was reported as neutral, while others stated it was
negative  or  positive.  The  most  affected  domain  is  emotional  wellbeing
specifically related to anxiety and depression. Further domains were economic
burden and social functioning. Socio-demographic and cultural differences were
also identified as variables that can influence caregivers QoL.
Discussion/implications
The impact of type 2 diabetes on caregivers QoL is apparent in an initial overview
of the affected QoL domains. Healthcare professionals’ awareness of the impact
of type 2 diabetes on caregivers’ QoL is essential to enable effective integrated
healthcare.
Conclusion
The impact of type 2 diabetes in caregivers’ QoL requires further research,
especially  to  take  into  consideration  socio-demographic  and  cultural  and
differences. Education programmes are useful to raise awareness of healthcare
professionals,  and  help  them  to  assess  the  impact  of  Type
2 diabetes  on
caregivers QoL.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP566
EP567
Effects of gender on IGF1 changes after initial basal insulin analog
therapy in the type 2 diabetics
Soner Cander1, Ozen Oz Gul2, Pinar Sisman3, Nizameddin Koca5, Oguzhan
Sitki Dizdar3, Taner Aydin4, Metin Guclu1, Emre Sarandol6 & Canan Ersoy2
1
Bursa Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;2Uludag University Medical School, Endo-
crinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;3Kayseri Training and Research
Hospital, Internal Medicine, Kayseri, Turkey;4Afyonkarahisar State
Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey;5Bursa
Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Internal Medicine, Bursa,
Turkey;6Uludag University Medical School, Biochemistry, Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Serum IGF1 levels declined particularly with hyperglycemia in diabetic patients
and lower IGF1 levels has been suggested to be associated with the development
of diabetes. IGF1 levels appear to increase with the improvement in glycemic
control in diabetic patients but do not reach normal levels. Also, it affected by
gender; in this study we aimed to investigate effects of gender on IGF1 changes
with basal insulin analogs.
Methods
The serum total IGF1 levels of the 62 insulin-native type 2 diabetic patients were
studied before and after 12 weeks of the started treatment with basal insulin
analogs. 42 patients using insulin detemir and 20 patients on insulin glargine were
evaluated.
Results
Mean age of patients were 57.0G6.4 in the males (nZ27) and 55.2G7.1 in the
females (nZ35). Changes in the IGF1 values are calculated as 0.5% decrease in
the males and 2.1% increase in the females. Means IGF1 levels were 111.7G38.4
in the males and 111.5G47.5 before insulin therapy and were 107.6G35.9 in the
males and 108.8G47.8 in the females at the end of the study. IGF1 change means
were -4.1 and -2.6 in the males and females respectively.
Conclusion
In our study, it was observed that, while IGF1 levels remained unchanged or
increased in the detemir groups, levels dropped at the level close to significance in
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
the glargine group. The changes in the IGF1 level were found to be more evident
in the males. The change differences between the male and female patients could
be explained with the fact that BMI averages were different and that the daily
variability in the serum IGF1 level was higher depending on the cyclic estrogen
fluctuation in the females.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP567
EP568
Half of three regimen for treatment of T2 DM in low income
populations
Mohamed Mashahit & Ahmed Hammad
Fayoum University, Fayoum, Egypt.
According to the seventh edition of diabetes atlas, 415 million persons all over the
world are diabetics requiring more than 680 billion US $ annually for their
management. Diabetes affects middle and low socio economic countries than
developed countries. The ADA/EASD guidelines included drug price as one of
the criteria to choose from different classes. Incretin based therapy are new classes
for treatment of T2 DM with low incidence of hypoglycemia and modest weight
loss, but its disadvantage is its higher cost compared to other agents.
Aim
The aim of this work is compare the efficacy of treating T2 DM patients with l
metformin and DPP4-I fixed combination (full dose) versus continuing on only
the half dose plus adding a half dose of an SU.
Methodology
This study included 194 T2 DM patients who achieved glycemic targets (A1c 7%)
on fixed dose of DPP4-I and metformin twice daily, but for financial reasons part
of them cannot afford to continue. So we had two groups, G1 who continued the
same regimen, and G2 who will continue on only half of the dpp4i/metformin
dose plus a small dose of an SU. Blood sugar, AIC weight will be measured at the
start of the study and after 3 months. Major or minor Hypoglycemic events will be
reported, also the treatment cost will be calculated for each group.
Results
Comparing the results of both groups, it was found that in G1 the mean A1c was
6.7 0.G42 vs 6.8G0.53 in G2, also there were no statistical significance between
G1 AND g2 regarding mean FBS PPBS and weight G1 regimen had significantly
fewer events of minor hypoglycemia (0.2 event/patient/3 month) compared to G2
(0.39
event/patient/3
month)
(P:0.031),  that  is also  one  attack  of  sever
hypoglycemia in G2. Also the cost of treatment per patient for 3 months was
around 700 Egyptian pounds in G1 and only 420 pound for G2.
Conclusion
In our study patients who cannot afford for the full dose of DPP4-I can continue
on the have dose plus a small dose of SU with the same efficacy but mild increase
in the incidence of hypoglycemic events.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP568
EP569
Combined metformin-associated lactic acidosis and euglycaemic
ketoacidosis
Verena Schwetz1, Florian Eisner2, Gernot Schilcher2, Kathrin Eller4,
Johannes Plank3, Alice Lind1, Thomas R Pieber1, Julia K Mader1 &
Philipp Eller2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and
Diabetology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;2Intensive Care
Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz,
Austria;3Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology
and Hepatology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;4Department of
Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Medical University of Graz,
Graz, Austria.
Introduction
In metformin-associated lactic acidosis with renal dysfunction inhibition of
hepatic gluconeogenesis by drug accumulation may aggravate fasting induced-
ketoacidosis. We report the occurrence of metformin-associated lactic acidosis
with concurrent euglycemic ketoacidosis in three patients with renal failure.
Cases
The first patient was a 79-year-old woman who suffered from chronic kidney
disease stage IIIa after traumatic uninephrectomy, and had been on metformin
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
therapy for over 10 years. She had been vomiting for 2 days, and was admitted to
our intensive care unit with acute renal failure (serum creatinine 9.0 mg/dl) and
lactic acidosis (pHZ6.89, lactic acid 22 mmol/l). The patient also displayed
elevated serum ketoacids of 7.4 mmol/l at blood glucose level of 63 mg/dl.
Euglycaemic ketoacidosis receded under treatment with intravenous glucose
infusions.
The  second  patient  was  a  78-year-old  woman  who  had  been  treated  with
metformin for T2DM and presented to our hospital with acute gastroenteritis. She
displayed acute on chronic renal failure (serum creatinine 9.0 mg/dl) and lactic
acidosis (pHZ6.80, lactic acid 14.7 mmol/l). Again we detected elevated serum
ketoacids
(6.4 mmol/l),  even  though  blood  glucose  was  in  normal  range
(76 mg/dl). Ketoacidosis abated after infusion of glucose.
The third patient was a 71-year-old man who had been treated with metformin,
canagliflozin and liraglutide for T2DM and presented with acute gastroenteritis.
He displayed acute renal failure (serum creatinine 13.6 mg/dl) and lactic acidosis
(pHZ7.21, lacitic acid 5.9 mmol/l). The patient also displayed elevated serum
ketoacids of 16 mmol/l and blood glucose of 152 mg/dl. Ketoacidosis receded
with intravenous glucose infusions.
Discussion
The concurrent occurrence of euglycaemic ketoacidosis in patients suffering from
metformin-associated lactic acidosis poses a peculiar diagnostic and therapeutic
challenge. This case series highlights the parallel occurrence of metformin-
associated lactic acidosis and euglycemic ketoacidosis, the latter exceeding
ketosis  due  to  starvation,  suggesting  a  metformin-triggered  inhibition  of
gluconeogenesis. Affected patients benefit from glucose infusion counteracting
suppressed hepatic gluconeogenesis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP569
EP570
The effect of liraglutide in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: clinical
and metabolic characteristics
Andreja Maric, Tea Premosa, Sonja Medjimurec, Maja Mikolaj Kiric &
Dunja Molnar
County Hospital Cakovec, Cakovec, Croatia.
Introduction
In patients with non-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2) and obesity treated
with oral therapy, liraglutide treatment should improve glycemic and metabolic
control.
Materials and methods
Retrospective  descriptive  study.  Liraglutide  treatment  was  started  in
46
outpatients with uncontrolled DM2. The effect of therapy was evaluated between
September 2013 and January 2016. Age, sex, duration of diabetes, weight, BMI,
HbA1c,  fasting  and  postprandial  glucose,  lipid  profile,  were  extracted  at
baseline/starting liraglutide, after 1, 3 and 6 months and at the end of follow up.
Results
Average age in 32 females was 59.3G18.2 years (range 35-82), in 14 males
55.8G16.3 (range 37-74 years); Duration of DM2 was 2 months-17 years in
females, and 6 months-12 years in male patients. Baseline values:
Women: Weight 85-130 kg, BMI 35.2-48.9 kg/m2, HbA1c 6.5-10.4%, fasting
glucose
5.7-11.2 mmol/l,  postprandial  glucose
7.2-14.2 mmol/l,  cholesterol
2.9-6.6 mmol/l,  trygliceride
1.1-3.4 mmol/l,  HDL
1-1.5 mmol/l,  LDL
1.2-4.6 mmol/l.
Men:  Weight  90-142 kg,  BMI  35.2-41.7 kg/m2,  HbA1c  7.1-14.2%,  fasting
glucose
6.4-14.3 mmol/l,  postprandial  glucose
9.8-20.7 mmol/l,  cholesterol
3.8-11.3 mmol/l,  trygliceride
1.8-22.5 mmol/l,  HDL
0.9-1.9 mmol/l,  LDL
1.9-9.8 mmol/l.
After 1 month females lost 1-8 kg, males 0-3 kg. After 3 months women lost
1-16 kg, and men 1-4 kg. After 6 months females lost 3-18 kg (1 patient C2 kg),
and males 2-4 kg (1 patient C4 kg).
At the end of follow up (21 months for women, and 15 months for men) female
patients lost 2-18 kg, males 2-5 kg, although two female and two male had
weight gain. At 15 female and six male patients final dose of liraglutide was
1.8 mg s.c., and in five women and two men basal insulin was added. HbA1c was
5.5-7.5% in female, and 5.9-9.1% in male patients.
Conclusion
Liraglutide therapy resulted in glycemic improvement and weight loss in most
patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP570
EP571
Analysis and metabolic evaluation in a standard clinical setting of a
group of patients 7 years after a clinical trial with sensor-augmented
pump (SAP)
Marta Domínguez-López, Natalia Colomo Rdriguez & M Soledad Ruiz de
Adana Navas
Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Málaga, Spain.
Background and objective
Several trials showed that sensor-augmented pump (SAP) therapy is safe and
effective to reduce hypoglycemic events and improve glicemic control with high
treatment satisfaction. Nevertheless patient adherence and sensor use in trials
usually decrease with time. Our objective was to evaluate metabolic control and
adherence and sensor use after initiation of SAP in a clinical trial.
Methods
In 2008 we recruited 25 patients in treatment with insulin pump (CSII) to start
SAP for 6 months. After the trial the patients had the opportunity to maintain the
SAP treatment, but only 15 patients did desire to goon with SAP therapy despite a
high global evaluation of the device. We evaluate the 25 patients again 7 years
after returning to clinical trial.
Results
Seven years after returning to standard clinical care, only 5 of the 25 patients
(20%) were still continuously using the sensor. The HbA1c in patients with SAP
was 6.9G0.4% and in patients without SAP was 7.3G0.4% withou statistically
significant difference. The patients in SAP therapy made 6.3G0.8 SMBG tests per
day and in the no SAP group the number of SMBG per day was 4.9G1.4
(PZ0.04). No statistically differences were found in quality of life between SAP
and no SAP group. Patients in SAP therapy were using it mean 60% of the time.
Most problems  about SAP use were referred  with accuracy and daily life
interference (no SAP group).
Conclusion
Our results show that in a standard clinical setting still long time benefits can be
found  in  type
1 diabetes  patients  treated  with  SAP  after  a  clinical  trial.
Nevertheless, new strategies to improve patient adherence to SAP should be
developed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP571
EP572
Ameliorative effects of Treculia Africana aqueous seed extract on
hyperglycemia and testicular histopathological alterations in
alloxan-diabetic rats
Victor Ukwenya1 & Abraham Osinubi2
1Ekiti State University, Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria;2University of Lagos, Lagos,
Nigeria.
Introduction
Treculia Africana (TA) has been used as an anti-inflammatory agent by the
Yoruba people of West Africa and is also known to be a component of an ancient
anti-diabetic remedy used in the Western and Middle belt areas of Nigeria. This
study  was  conducted  to investigate  the anti-hyperglycemic  property  of  the
aqueous seed extract of Treculia Africana (TAE) and also to evaluate the potential
of this extract in reversing the toxicity inflicted by experimentally-induced
diabetes on the testes.
Methods
Twenty adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into four groups
(A-D) of five rats each. Groups A, B and C were injected with alloxan while
Group D served as the normal control and received distilled water only. After
4 weeks of sustained hyperglycemia, groups A, B, and C rats were administered
TAE (200 mg/kg per day), glibenclamide (10 mg/kg per day) and distilled water,
respectively. Body weight and blood glucose concentrations were evaluated. At
the end of 8 weeks all animals were sacrificed and the testes were processed for
light microscopy.
Results
TAE caused significant reduction (36.27%) in blood glucose concentration at
P!0.001 compared to the diabetic control, while glibenclamide caused 70.61%
reduction. The weight of the testes of TAE-treated rats showed significant
increase compared with the untreated diabetic group. The distorted seminiferous
tubules of the diabetic control rats had just a few scattered spermatogonia and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
spermatids while the testes of the TAE-treated diabetic rats showed seminiferous
tubules  lined  by  Sertoli  cells,  with  relatively  normal  germinal  epithelium.
Stereologic  analysis  showed  increased  germinal  epithelial  thickness,  cross-
sectional area and volume for treated groups compared to the diabetic control
group.
Conclusion
Histologic and stereologic analysis indicate that TAE would be a good adjunct in
the treatment of diabetes mellitus associated with reproductive deficiencies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP572
EP573
The influence of a-lipoic acid to endothelial dysfunction and adipokines
balance in patients with type 2 diabetes and essential hypertension in the
presence of unfavorable genetic polymorphism
Anna Shalimova1, Alexander Belovol2, Lesya Bobronnikova2,
Marina Kochueva1, Valentina Psareva3 & Natalya Kirichenko3
1Kharkiv Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kharkiv, Ukraine;
2Kharkiv National Medical University, Kharkiv, Ukraine;3Sumy State
University, Sumy, Ukraine.
The aim
To  establish  unfavorable  genetic  polymorphisms  on  the  development of
comorbidity of DM2 and EH in Ukrainian population and to evaluate the
effectiveness of a-lipoic acid appointment (a-LC) in complex therapy in patients
with 3-4 crossed unfavorable genetic polymorphisms.
The primary examination of 167 patients with DM2 in combination with EH
showed that A/C and C/C genotypes of AGTR1, Pro/Pro genotype of PPARg2,
Arg/Arg and Gly/Arg genotypes of IRS-1, T/T and C/T genotypes of TCF7L2 are
characterized by more severe hemodynamic and metabolic disorders, cardiovas-
cular remodeling, thus, these genotypes can be regarded as unfavorable genotypes
that are associated with the development of comorbidity. It was proved that in 96
patients with 3-4 crossed unfavorable genetic polymorphisms the severity of these
disorders was greater than in 71 patients with 1-2 crossed unfavorable genotypes.
Among 96 patients with 3-4 crossed unfavorable genetic polymorphisms two
groups were distinguished: 47 patients received standard therapy and 49 patients
additionally received a-LC (600 mg/day) for 3 months. It was established that the
appointment of a-LC contributed to a more pronounced effect on endothelial
dysfunction (ED) that confirmed a greater degree of endothelium-dependent
vasodilation and higher levels of oxidative indicators stress (diene conjugates and
malondialdehyde) in the inhibition of antioxidant system parameters (superoxide
dismutase and catalase) (P!0.001). Furthermore the additional appointment of a-
LC impacted more to the functioning of adipose tissue, which showed a more
pronounced decrease in leptin (P!0.001) and increase in adiponectin (P!0.01),
compared to basic therapy.
Conclusions
A/C and C/C genotypes of AGTR1, Pro/Pro genotype of PPARg2, Arg/Arg and
Gly/Arg genotypes of IRS-1, T/T and C/T genotypes of TCF7L2 are associated
with the development of comorbidity of DM2 and EH. The additional a-LC
appointment to standard therapy impacted more to the severity of ED and
adypokines balance than basic therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP573
EP574
Role of community pharmacists in the prevention and management of
the metabolic syndrome in Albania
Edmond Pistja & Alba Themeli
Medical Training Center Santa Maria, Lezhe, Albania.
Background
The metabolic syndrome is a cluster of diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors
and its prevalence is alarmingly high in Albania, affecting nearly 20% of the adult
population. There is lack of information about the role of community pharmacists
in the care of patients with the metabolic syndrome.
Objective
To assess the awareness and opinions of community pharmacists about the
metabolic syndrome and identify the services they provide for identification,
management and monitoring of patients with the metabolic syndrome.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Setting
25 Community pharmacies in the capital of Albania (Tirana).
Method
A descriptive, cross-sectional study was performed on a randomly selected
sample of 52 community pharmacists. Data were collected via face-to-face
structured interview of the pharmacists using a pre-tested questionnaire.
Main outcome measures
Pharmacists’ knowledge and views on the metabolic syndrome, monitoring
services provided, self-reported practices and perceived effectiveness of the
various management interventions for the metabolic syndrome.
Results
The response rate was 97.8%. Nine pharmacists claimed to know about the
metabolic  syndrome,  but  only  one  pharmacist  could  identify  the  condition
correctly. After being given a definition of the metabolic syndrome, 67.7% of
respondents strongly agreed that its prevalence was rising in Albania. Nearly two
thirds of respondents reported providing height and weight measurement service
while 82.7 and 59.5% of pharmacies provided blood pressure and blood glucose
measurements, respectively. Waist circumference and lipid profile measurements
were the least provided services (1.8%). Respondents claimed to be involved in
counseling  patients  on  lifestyle  modifications  including  increased  exercise
(98.1%) and weight reduction through diet (96.9%). Most pharmacists were
involved in encouraging patients’ adherence with prescribed treatments (98.6%)
and perceived these as the most effective intervention for the management of the
metabolic syndrome (95.0%). Respondents were less involved in monitoring
patients’ response to therapy (75.0%) and documenting patient care services
(5.0%).
Conclusion
To the author knowledge this is the first study of this kind in Albania. This study
revealed significant deficits in awareness among community pharmacists about
the metabolic syndrome. Given the proper education and training, community
pharmacists could be important front-line contributors to the control of this
emerging epidemic in Albania.
Keywords: metabolic syndrome, community pharmacists, education, Albania
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP574
EP575
Galangin, a dietary flavonoid improves antioxidant status and reduces
hyperglycemia mediated oxidative stress in streptozotocin-induced
diabetic rats
Khalid S Al-Numair, Chinnadurai Veeramani,
Chandramohan Govindasamy & Mohammed A Alsaif
Department of Community Health Sciences College of Applied Medical
Sciences King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Objective
This study was planned to examine the effect of galangin on hyperglycemia
mediated oxidative stress in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats.
Methods
Diabetes was induced by intraperitoneal administration of low dose of STZ
(40 mg/kg body weight (BW)) into male albino Wistar rats. Galangin (8 mg/kg
BW) or glibenclamide (600 mg/kg BW) was given orally daily once for 45 days to
normal and STZ-induced diabetic rats.
Results
Diabetic  rats  showed  significantly  increased  levels  of  plasma  glucose,
thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS), lipid hydroperoxides (LOOH),
and conjugated dienes (CD). The levels of insulin, non-enzymic antioxidants
(vitamin C, vitamin E, reduced glutathione (GSH)) and the activity of enzymatic
antioxidants
(superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione per-
oxidase (GPx), and glutathione-S-transferase (GST)) were decreased significantly
in diabetic control rats. These altered plasma glucose, insulin, lipid peroxidation
products, enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants ions were reverted to near
normal level after the administration of galangin and glibenclamide.
Conclusion
The present study shows that galangin decreased oxidative stress and increased
antioxidant status in diabetic rats, which in turn may be due to its antidiabetic and
antioxidant potential.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP575
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP576
Trends and differences between sexes in control of diabetes and
cardiovascular risk factors from 2004 to 2014
Almudena Vicente, Claudia Cortés, Mónica Olivar, Ana Martínez,
Julia Sastre, Amparo Marco, Inés Luque & José López
Endocrinology Department, Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain.
Background
Poorer control of risk factors for cardiovascular disease (cvd) has been reported in
diabetic women compared with men.
Objective
To investigate whether control of diabetes and risk factors for cvd differ between
sexes in a cohort of diabetic patients monitored at an outpatient endocrinology
clinic from 2004 till 2014.
Design
Observational, retrospective cohort study.
Patients and methods
A cohort of 424 randomly selected diabetic patients (dm type 2 (dm2) 84.6%;
58.3% female; mean age 63.4 years and mean diabetes duration 15.7 years) was
monitored from 2004 to 2014. Final cohort size was 293 patients (dm2: 80.2%;
female 59.4%; mean age 69.3 years and diabetes duration 25.1 years). Data about
glycaemic,  lipid  and  blood  pressure
(bp)  control,  antiplatelet/anticoagulant
therapy were collected from clinical records at baseline and 10 years afterwards.
Results
In 2004, 27.8% of the men and 23.5% of the women had an hba1c ! 7%. This
increased to 36.8% in men and 39.3% in women in 2014 (P!0.001). Patients
having systolic bp (sbp) ! 140 mm hg changed from 79.5% to 75.9% and from
70% to 56.4% in men and women respectively (P!0.001). Patients with ldl-
cholesterol ! 100 mg/dl increased from 44.3% to 81.2% in men and 44.9% to
85.2% in women (P!0.001). Obesity increased in men (35.2% to 38.3%) and
decreased in women (63.6% to 58.2%) (P!0,05). Antiplatelet/anticoagulant
therapy increased from 46.9% to 68.4% in men and 39.7% to 68.6% in women
(P!0.001). In 2014, all patients with cvd were on antiplatelet/anticoagulant
therapy. Smoking was more frecuent in men (27.7% versus 4.7%) (P!0.001).
Conclusions
After 10 years of follow-up, glycaemic and lipid control and use of antiplatelet
agents has improved in both sexes. No significant difference was found in risk
factors control between men and women, except for sbp and obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP576
EP577
Antidepressant treatment worsens metabolic control in type 2 diabetes
mellitus
Jose Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1 & Carmen Maria Cortes-Salazar2
1Endocrinology Department. Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital,
Malaga, Spain;2Badolatosa Primary Care Centre, Seville, Spain.
Objectives
To evaluate the use of antidepressant drugs in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus
(T2DM) and to analyse if these drugs are associated with a more
deteriorated metabolic control.
Methods
Cross-sectional study which included patients with T2DM followed in a primary
care setting. Data about age, sex, T2DM evolution, body mass index (BMI),
HbA1c and associated antidepressant treatment was collected. Statistical analysis
was performed with SPSS v 15.0 for Windows.
Results
79 patients were included, with a mean age of 70.1G11.8 years (63.3% men) and
a mean duration of T2DM of 5.9G5 years. 47% of patients were under treatment
with antidepressant drugs (men 30%, women 65%, pZ0.018). Metabolic control
was  more  deteriorated  in  patients  with  associated  antidepressant  treatment
(HbA1c 7.1% vs 6.6%, pZ0.037), even after adjustment by sex, age and body
mass index.
Conclusions
A high rate  of  prescription of  antidepressant  drugs  is frequently found  in
individuals with T2DM, especially in women. T2DM patients under antidepress-
ant treatment show a worse metabolic control.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP577
EP578
The need of change in the treatment options for diabetes in acute
ischemic stroke
Baburhan Guldiken1, Burak Celik1, Merve Namli1, Buket Yilmaz Bulbul2,
Mehmet Celik2 & Sibel Guldiken2
1Trakya University Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, Edirne,
Turkey;2Trakya University Medical Faculty, Department of Internal
Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Edirne, Turkey.
Diabetes that is an important risk factor for ischemic stroke should also be well-
treated in acute ischemic stroke patients for the secondary prevention against the
next strokes. In the present study, we investigated the rate of the treatment
changes in diabetic acute ischemic stroke patients during their stay at hospital.
One hundred twelve acute diabetic ischemic stroke patients that were hospitalized
in the university neurology clinic were retrospectively evaluated. HbA1c levels
and the need of changes in antidiabetic drugs and doses were noted.
Mean HbA1c levels were 8.2G2.2%. In order to better regulate the blood glucose
levels, changes in the antidiabetic drugs had been made in 26.8% of patients.
Change of dosage was found necessary in 33.9% of patients. Use of insulin that
was seen 29% of patients increased to 37% at the time of discharge from hospital.
Diabetes was found undertreated before acute ischemic stroke. The need of
change in the diabetes treatment was observed in a significant ratio of the patients.
The neurologists who manage the treatment of the primary disease should also be
alert for the need of changes in the treatment of diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP578
EP579
Effect of short term GLP-1 modifying therapy on intima media
thickness
Bengur Taskiran, Guven Baris Cansu, Eylem Bahadir & Ruya Mutluay
Yunus Emre State Hospital, Eskisehir, Turkey.
Atherosclerosis is the major cause of death in type 2 DM. Increased intima media
thickness (IMT) denotes subclinical atherosclerosis. Endothelial cells express
GLP-1 receptors. There are a few studies regarding the effect of GLP-1 system
modifying agents on IMT. Although most of them indicates decreased IMT, the
results are contradictory.
We aimed to compare the effect of sitagliptin, vildagliptin, and exenatide on IMT
measurement in type 2 DM.
We enrolled 24 patients (7 male, 17 female, aged 53.5G8.2 years, DM duration
4.63G4.46 years, 15 hypertensive, mean initial hemoglobin A1c %7.66G1.43)
with type 2 DM. The patients were already using various combinations of oral
antidiabetic drugs including metformin, sulphonylurea, or pioglitazone. The data
of patients were collected from the records. IMT at baseline and after 6 months of
therapy were compared in 6 patients on sitagliptin, 9 on vildagliptin, and 9 on
exenatide. Initial and 6th month data (age, DM age, glucose, hemoglobin A1c,
calcium, LDL, HDL, triglyceride, TSH, and IMT) were similar in 3 groups. 3
groups differed significantly in terms of initial and 6th month BMI (PZ0.003 and
PZ0.001, respectively). When initial and 6th month data were compared in each
group, the difference did not persist.
3 drug groups had similar rates of plaque formation.
Right- and left-side IMT and mean IMT were similar between 3 groups both at
baseline and after 6 months of therapy. But when baseline and 6th month IMT
values were evaluated in each group, only right side IMT (lower) differed
significantly after 6 months of exenatide therapy (PZ0.046).
Although groups  are small  in size, sitagliptin  and vildagliptin  has no and
exenatide has slight impact on mean IMT in short term of therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP579
EP580
Protocol for the hyperglycemia and diabetes mellitus in hospitalization
José Pérez-Rodríguez, Dulce María Calderón-Vicente, David Martín-
Iglesias, Mubarak Alrramadan, María Victoria Cantero, María José Guillén
& Santiago Aranda-Regules
Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Virgen de la Luz Hospital,
Cuenca, Spain.
Introduction and objectives
Hyperglycemia is present in about 25% of hospitalized patients. His control is
common deficient. Consequently it increases the average stay, infection rates and
mortality. In order to improve we present a comprehensive protocol.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
We  developed  algorithms  of  subcutaneous  insulin  therapy  for  non-critical
patients, insulin therapy i.v. for critical patients, management of hypoglycemia,
fasting situations, diabetic ketoacidosis/hyperosmolar state, and performance at
hospital discharge.
Results
1. Subcutaneous insulinization for patient not critical. Patient previously with
insulin: basal/24 h (glargine/detemir) C bolus(glulisine/lispro/aspart) breakfast,
lunch and dinner C correction bolus a(!40u), b(40-80u), c(O80u). Patient
previously within insulin: regular insulin regimen breakfast/lunch/dinner/6-8 h in
fasting. O16u/24 h pass to basal-bolus-correction. Fasting: *!24 h: suspend
bolus and maintain basal C bolus correction *O 24 h: serum-insulina i.v./6 h.
2. Insulin i.v. for critical patient. 1. fluid line: glucosaline 5% 60-100 ml/hG
1.2 meq/kg of clk. Insulin line 2: saline 0.9% 100 ml with 100 u regular insulin.
Insulin infusion (ml/u/h) by patterns 1, 2, 3, 4 based on blood glucose and
variation. Transition to subcutaneous insulin: insulin last 6 h!4, 50% basal
insulin - 50% bolus insulin, maintain perfusion three hours after putting basal
insulin.
3. Management of hypoglycemia (!70 mg/dl). Patient conscious and can ingest:
200 ml water with two sugar packets. Patient unconscious or unable to ingest:
10 g glucose (i.v.) or glucagon 1 mg (sc/im). Repeat procedure if blood sugar
below 70 mg/dl in 15 min.
4.  Diabetic  ketoacidosis  and  hyperosmolar  state.
1.  fluids:
1000 ml
0.9%
saline/1 h,  after
250-500 ml/h.  When  glucose
!200 mg/dl  glucosaline
5%
100-150 ml/h. 2. insulin: 0.1 u/kg of regular insulin bolus directly. i.v. insulin
infusion beginning with pattern 2. 3. potassium: k!3.3 meq/l: 20 meqk/500 ml,
k3,3-5,3 meq/l: 10 meqk/500 ml. KO5.3 meq/l: not manage. 4.bicarbonate: if
ph !7% half deficit administer 1/6 m in 4-6 h and revaluate.
5. Performance at hospital discharge. Apply for hba1c if not available in last three
months. Dm known and hba1c !8%: pretreatment. Dm unknown or hba1cO8%:
initiate/intensify treatment.
Conclusions
We believe that this protocol will contribute to better management of blood
glucose by different professionals in hospitalization. It remains to evaluate their
impact after his introduction.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP580
EP581
Diabetic hyperlipidemia: from guidelines into clinical practice
Bayar Qasim
Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, Duhok University,
Duhok city/Kurdistan, Iraq.
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality
despite steadily improving standards of care. Coronary heart disease (CHD) is by
far the most common cause of death in individuals with diabetes.
A characteristic pattern, termed diabetic dyslipidemia, consists of specifically
mild to marked elevation of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (VLDLs) and VLDL
remnants concentrations and low levels of HDL-C. Raised serum triglycerides
and low HDL-C often precede the onset of T2DM for many years. In addition,
LDL particles are converted to smaller, perhaps more atherogenic, lipoproteins
termed ’small-dense LDLs’.
Different mechanisms are responsible for the development of dyslipidemia in
individuals with diabetes. Defects in insulin action and hyperglycemia could lead
to  dyslipidemia  in  patients  with  diabetes.  In  the  case  of  T2DM,  the
obesity/insulin-resistant state that is at the basis of the development of this
disease can in itself lead to lipid abnormalities independently of hyperglycemia.
In poorly controlled T1DM hypertriglyceridemia and reduced HDL-C commonly
occur, but in most cases insulin replacement in these patients correct these
abnormalities. In T2DM, this phenotype is not usually fully corrected with
glycemic control, suggesting that insulin resistance and not hyperglycemia per se
are associated with this lipid abnormality.
Primary therapy should be directed towards lowering LDL-C levels. A statin
should be chosen depending on the LDL-C reduction needed to achieve the target
value (!70 mg/dl) and upon the judgment of the physician. Although usually not
very effective for raising HDL-C levels, statins might be effective at reducing
moderately  elevated  triglycerides,  thus  reducing  the  need  for  combination
therapy. Addition of fibrates may be indicated when triglycerides are high and
HDL-C is low.
This review will give an update regarding management of dyslipidemia of
diabetic patients to achieve the best clinical outcome regarding reduction of CVS
mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP581
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Endocrine Disruptors
EP582
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and estrogen receptor-dependent
pathway are linked with ovarian cancer cell growth and migration
caused by cigarette smoke extracts in human ovarian cancer cells
Geon-Tae Park, So-Ye Jeon & Kyung-Chul Choi
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
Cigarette smoke contains over 60 well established carcinogens. There are strong
links between some of these carcinogens and various types of smoking-induced
cancers. In this study we investigated whether cigarette smoke extracts (CSEs)
affects the cell proliferation, migration, and invasion of BG-1 human ovarian cancer
cells by alteration of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We confirmed that
CSEs increased the ovarian cancer cell viability in a dose-dependent manner. Also
the protein expression of cyclin D1 and cyclin E1 was increased while p21 and p27
expression was decreased by treatment of all CSEs (3R4F and two-domestic
commercial cigarettes). Additionally the alteration of EMT markers such as
E-cadherian and N-cadherin was examined. The expression of E-cadherin was
reduced by the treatment of CSEs while its reverse transition marker N-cadherin was
increased.  EMT-associated  transcriptional  factors,  Snail  and  Slug  were  also
up-regulated by CSEs treatment. These results indicate that CSEs can increase
EMT process in BG-1 ovarian cancer cells, which is associated with cancer cell
migration. We examined the migration activity through scratch assay and fibronectin
coated trans-well invasion assay, in which CSEs increased cancer cell migratory
propensity. These functional alterations were associated with changes in the
metastasis-related genes. Upon CSEs stimulation, the expression of MMP-9 and
cathepsin D was increased. Taken together, we confirmed that CSEs increased the
growth of human ovarian cancer cells and the development of metastasis by
stimulating cell cycle and EMT process through up- and down-regulation of a
multiple cellular markers and signaling proteins and that CSEs exposure might have
a higher risk of ovarian cancer than nonsmokers. Based on the results of this in vitro
study, we will examine the in vivo risk assessment of CSEs in a xenografted mouse
model transplanted with BG-1 human ovarian cancer cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP582
EP583
Thyroid diseases in the ‘Land of Fires’: results of a single center
screening in Acerra (Naples)
Renata Simona Auriemma1, Mariaconcetta Cozzolino1, Arturo Belli1,
Gaetano Fierro1, Gaetana Messina1, Renato De Luca1, Teresa De Simone1,
Matteo Rivezzi1, Mariano Galdiero1, Cristina de Angelis1,
Rosario Pivonello2 & Annamaria Colao2
1Ios and Coleman Medicina Futura Medical Center, Naples, Italy;
2Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Sezione di Endocrinologia,
University Federico II, Naples, Italy.
Introduction
Environmental  toxins,  including  those  deriving  from  illegal  and  hazardous
disposal of urban and chemical waste, are known to act as endocrine disruptors
and to increase the risk of malignancy and cancer mortality. The present study
aimed at investigating prevalence and characteristics of thyroid diseases in the
area of Acerra, a town in the perimeter of the so called ‘Land of Fires’.
Methods
The screening included subjects aged R15 yrs living in Acerra. Overall, 787
consecutive subjects (631 F, 156 M, aged 39.6G16.3 yrs) were recruited on a
voluntary basis. Iodine supplementation, thyroid palpation, hormonal testing
(TSH, fT3, fT4, antithyroid antibodies), ultrasound and fine needle cytology
(FNC, when necessary) were investigated. According to the age tertiles, subjects
were classified as Group A (age !24 yrs, noZ236), Group B (Age 25-52 yrs,
noZ310) an Group C (age O 52 yrs, noZ241).
Results
Prevalence of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and nodular goiter was 13.5% and 17.5% of
the whole cohort, respectively, being not different as compared to that of the Italian
general population. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis was significantly prevalent in C
compared to A (PZ0.021), and hyperthyroidism in C compared to A (PZ0.003)
and B (PZ0.03). Prevalence of nodular goiter was higher in C as compared to A
(P!0.001) and B (P!0.001), and in subjects who did not use iodine
supplementation (PZ0.032) as compared to those who did. Among subjects
undergone FNC, none had thyroid cancer and all were classified as benign nodular
disease (THY2).
Conclusion
These findings suggest that subjects living in the area of Acerra had a similar
prevalence of thyroid diseases as compared to the Italian general population and
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
did not present with an increased prevalence of thyroid cancers despite chronic
exposure to environmental pollutants.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP583
EP584
Estimation of bisphenol A influence on obesity
Milica Medic Stojanoska1, Natasa Milosevic2, Vladimir Jaksic3,
Bojan Vukovic4, Ivana Bajkin1, Andrijana Milankov1, Ivanka Percic4,
Tijana Icin1, Branka Kovacev Zavisic1 & Natasa Milic2
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Clinical
Center of Vojvodina, Medical Faculty University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad,
Serbia;2Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi
Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia;3Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Novi
Sad, Serbia;4Emergency Center, Clinical Center of Vojvodina, Medical
Faculty University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
Introduction
Obesity is a global health problem. More than half (54%) of the adult population
in Serbia and 58.5% of adult population in the north province, Vojvodina is obese
or overweight. Hence, it is urgent to identify environmental factors which may
contribute obesity. Bisphenol A (BPA) is one of the most extensively used
chemical  in  production  of food  and  beverage  containers,  epoxy  resins,
polycarbonate plastics and well known endocrine disruptor. The aim of this
study is to determine the prevalence of BPA in urine samples in women in
Vojvodina and to determine the association between BPA and obesity in women.
Method
The study was conducted in the Clinical Centre of Vojvodina and 103 women age
between 18 and 55 were enrolled in the study and in their urine samples BPA was
determined. Women were divided according to their body mass index (BMI) into two
groups: N-normal weight (BMI!25 kg/m2) and O-obese group (BMIR30 kg/m2).
Results
BPA was detected in 36% (37/103) women, 31% (16/52) in the N-group and 41%
(21/51) in the O-group. The average concentration of BPA was 12.24G10.55 mg/g
creatinine. The groups were additionally divided into two subgroups: BPA positive
(BPAC) and BPA negative (BPAK). There was statistically significant linear
correlation between BPA concentration in the urine sample and BMI (rZ0.59,
PZ0.003) as well as between waist circumference and BMI (rZ0.45, PZ0.02) in
the O-group. However, no statistical difference was found between BMI, waist
circumference, or lipid status: HDL, LDL and total cholesterol among BPAC and
BPA- subgroups in both N- and O-group. The highest BPA concentrations were
detected in younger women with highest BMI.
Conclusion
BPA is one of the most important factors which may contribute the increment of
BMI and waist circumference, while HDL, LDL and total cholesterol may be
associate factors which additionally influence obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP584
EP585
Impact of EDCs on cation transporter channel in the mouse placenta
during pregnancy
Myoungho Lee, Jae-Hwan Lee, Tran Dinh Nam, Jin Yong An &
Eui-Bae Jeung
College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.
Placenta  exchanges  vital  factors  including  oxygen,  carbon  dioxide,  cation
(copper, iron, calcium) and glucose that are essential to fetal growth. Copper, iron,
calcium cation and glucose transfer genes are regulated by reproduction-related
hormones,  vitamin  D  and  human  placental  lactogen.  These  molecules  are
transferred by specific receptors located on cell membrane or cytoplasm in
placenta. These substances disturb action of reproduction-related hormones (exO
estrogen, progesterone) by interacting with their receptors, or affecting the
expression of transporting genes for cations. To examine the effects of EDCs
exposure  during  pregnancy,  we  conducted  the  in  vivo  model  study  using
Pregnancy mouse. We used different doses of octyl-phenol (OP; 50 mg/kg/day),
and bisphenol A (BPA; 50 mg/kg/day) in pregnancy mice for GD 11.5w16.5.
Ethinyl estradiol (EE; 0.2 mg/kg/day), which activates estrogen receptors, was
used as a positive control. ICI 182 780 (70 ug/kg) were used with estrogen
antagonist. Transcription of calcium transporting genes, copper transporting
genes, and iron transporting genes was quantified by qRT-PCR. Treatment with
EE, OP, BPA in a mouse placenta affected expression of calcium transporting
genes (PMCA1, TRPV6), copper transporting genes (CTR1, ATP7A), and iron
transporting genes (IREG1, HEPH). Expression of the gene was confirmed in the
control group and the experimental group. In the result of real-time PCR, relative
mRNA expression levels of PMCA1, TRPV6, ATP7A, CTR1, HEPH, IREG1 in
some group were decreased or increase compared to the vehicle control. We
concluded essential cation transporting genes in placenta are modulated by EDCs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP585
EP586
2,4,6-tribromophenol inhibit overall thyroid function in mouse
Tran Dinh Nam, Dongoh Lee, Jin Yong An, Song Ai Kang & Eui-Bae Jeung
College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.
Synthesized chemicals that not existed in the environment have been troubled
endocrine physiology. These endocrine disruptors (EDs) had been noted and
replaced with other chemicals. Most of compound banned for production act as an
estrogen. But other than estrogen, especially thyroid hormone related EDs are
noted for early brain and neural development. Brominated flame retardants
(BFRs) are representative known as thyroid disruptor because of its structural
similarity. 2,4,6-tribromophenol (TBP), one of BFRs, has been produced bulky
for reagent of thermostable plastic. Its effect to thyroid system related with
transthyretin (TTR) is studied in vivo. TTR is blood protein that has a high
binding affinity to thyroid hormones. ICR female mouse, post-natal 16 days, were
exposed to TBP with or without triiodothyronine (T3) or thyroxine (T4). Liver
and pituitary gland were dissected and RNA was extracted by Trizol. mRNA level
of each pituitary gland and liver was quantified using quantitative real time PCR.
Serum level of each free thyroid hormone was measured by Immulite 1000. Dio1
was increased in pituitary gland and liver by TBP. Reduction of thyroid hormone
receptor  beta,  isoform
2
(Thrb2)  and  Dio2
inductions  of  Gh  and  thyroid
stimulating hormone b (Tshb) were observed in pituitary gland. Thyroid hormone
receptor beta, isoform 1 (Thrb1) was reduced by TBP in liver. Each free thyroid
hormone level was decreased by TBP and its inhibition effect was also observed
when treatment with thyroid hormones. TBP was shown anti-thyroid effect in
some way such as Dio1, Dio2, Tshb and Thrb2 in pituitary gland. TBP inhibited
expression of Dio1 and Thrb1 induced by thyroid hormones in liver. Finally, TBP
decrease  the  hormone  level  in  blood.  Like  other  BFRs,  TBP  also  shown
interfering effect to thyroid system.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP586
EP587
The effects of endocrine disruptors on the in vitroAVP hormone
regulation
Krisztian Sepp1, Zsuzsanna Valkusz1, Zsolt Molnar2, I Budai2,
Tunde Alapi3, Marianna Radacs2 & Marta Galfi2
1First Deparment of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary;
2Department of Environmental Biology ad Education of Gyula Juhasz
Faculty of Education, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary;3Department
of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry of Faculty of Science and
Informatics, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
Introduction
Endocrine disruptor compounds (EDCs) are chemicals that may interfere with the
endocrine system and produce adverse developmental, reproductive, neurological
and immune effects.These agents can be found in household, in the industry and in
our environment.Endocrine disruptors are substances that interfere with the
synthesis, secretion, transport, binding, action, or elimination of natural hormones
in  the  body that  are  responsible  for  development, behaviour, fertility,  and
maintenance of homeostasis.Our aim was to investigate the effects of uron
herbicides EDCs/fenuron (PU), monuron (MU), diuron (DU)/on the normal
endocrine regulation; particularly the monoamine activated arginine-vasopressi-
ne(AVP)release from neurohypophyseal cells.
Materials and methods
The primary monolayer cell cultures were the neuroendocrine regulated models.
These were prepared from the pituitary of normal Wistar rats (_).The separated
neurohypophysis
(NH)  tissues  were  dissociated  by  enzymatic
(trypsine,
collagenase, DNA-se I; II) and mechanic methods. The 14 days old cultures
were standardized for cell-viability and AVP content in NH cultures. The NH
cells were tested for functionally AVP hormone volume by aspecific osmotic
stimulus (30 mM KC). Untreated cultures were used as controls while further
cultures were treated with:- I.: 1 hour 0,1 mg/ml EDCs: MU, DU, PU -II.: 10K6M
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
monoamines (norepinephrine, dopamine, histamine) alone -III.: the monoamines
agents with EDCs combined. The AVP release was measured from supernatant
media by RIA method.
Results
The uron herbicides alone did not have significant effects on the AVP release in
the NH cell cultures. The monoamine activated hormone release strongly changed
by the EDCs, mainly the dopamine and histamine.
Conclusion
The psycho-neuro-endocrine-immune system modulated by various environ-
mental factors can lead to the development of different diseases in connection
with this complex network. This work was supported by: TÁMOP-4.2.2.D-
15/1/KONV-2015-0010, TÁMOP-4.2.4.A/2-11-1-2012-0001
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP587
Endocrine Nursing
EP588
Managing Children with Diabetes within the Family: Movement in the
orbit of diabetes
Neda Mehrdad1, Mahnaz Sanjari2 & Hamid Peyrovi3
1Diabetes Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran;
2Nursing and Midwifery School,Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran;3Nursing Care Research Center, Department of Critical Care
Nursing, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
Background
Diabetes is the disease of family and parents of children with diabetes face
different problems which concerns meeting the developmental needs of children
and daily control of children with diabetes.
Purpose
This article aims to explain how to manage diabetes around the child’s life within
the family.
Methods & materials
In this qualitative study, data was collected through semi-structured interview
technique and was analysed using Grounded Theory approach. The process of
data collection was carried out by purposeful sampling. The participants included
13 individuals from nine families (11 parents and two children with diabetes). The
research environment was health canters in Iran providing care to the families of
children with diabetes. Data analysis was performed using Corbin and Strauss
approach. Data was analysed with using MAXQDA software (version 10).
Results
The core category of “Movement in the orbit of diabetes” addresses the story of
how to keep track of managing children with diabetes within the family which
included Main categories “ride in the waves of care”, “provision of diabetes
backpack”, and “movement focused on children with diabetes”.
Conclusion
The outcome of “Movement in the orbit of diabetes” results capturing the control
of diabetes. The findings of the present study may play an integral part to help
households with practicing appropriate strategies for the management of children
with diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP588
Endocrine tumours and neoplasia
EP589
Proposal of a two-step dynamic prognostic stratification for stage IV
sporadic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
Vincenzo Marotta1, Thomas Walter2, Christine Do Cao3, Salvatore Tafuto4,
Vincenzo Montesarchio5, Julia Arfi-Rouche6, Pierre Jean Valette2,
Catherine Lombard-Bohas2, Emmanuelle Leteurtre3, Isabelle Borget6,
Jean Yves Scoazec6, Michel Ducreux6, Antongiulio Faggiano1,4,
Annamaria Colao1 & Eric Baudin6
1Federico II University, Naples, Italy;2Hospices Civils de Lyon, Edouard
Herriot Hospital, Lyon, France;3Lille University Hospital, Lille, France;
4INT Pascale, Naples, Italy;5Azienda dei Colli Hospital, Naples, Italy;
6Gustave Roussy Institute, Villejuif, France.
Purpose
To validate a prognostic stratification system of overall survival (OS) in stage IV
pancreatic  neuroendocrine  tumors
(pNETs)  naïve  of  therapy  by  analyzing
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
1) prognostic parameters at the time of stage IV diagnosis; 2) the role of
spontaneous tumor slope.
Patients and Methods
Multicenter retrospective study including consecutive patients diagnosed with
stage IV pNET from January 1997 to March 2014. Inclusion criteria were:
1. pNET with well-differentiated morphology; 2. measurable stage IV disease;
3.  diagnosis  and  follow-up  entirely  performed  at  the  participating  center.
Exclusion criteria were:
1.  systemic treatment prior work-up;
2.  hereditary
syndromes. The primary endpoint was OS. Univariate and multivariate analyses
were performed: model 1 “at the time of stage IV diagnosis”; model 2 “after the
definition of spontaneous tumor slope”.
Results
Two hundred and eight patients with stage IV pNET were included. Median
follow-up was 45 months. Parameters independently associated with OS were:
model 1. T parameter (T4, PZ0.04), metastatic tumor load (2 sites, PZ0.004;
O2 sites, PZ!0.0001), liver involvement (O70%, PZ!0.0001), grade (ki67
and/or mitotic index O10, PZ0.01); model 2. T parameter (T4, PZ0.04),
metastatic  tumor  load
(2
sites,  PZ0.006;  O2
sites,  P!0.0001),  liver
involvement
(O70%,  PZ0.0002),  grade  (ki67  and/or  mitotic  index  O10,
PZ0.03), and spontaneous tumor slope (progressive disease, PZ0.001).
Conclusions
Based on these results a two-step prognostic stratification of stage IV pNET
patients  is  proposed.  This  includes  the  number  of  tumor  organs,  liver
involvement, T4 and the grade at diagnosis, empowered by tumor slope at the
time of first imaging monitoring in patients subjected to watchful follow-up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP589
EP590
Localization of benign insulinomas using glucagon-like peptide-1
receptor (GLP1-R) SPECT/CT and PET/CT in a prospective
clinical study
Kwadwo Antwi1, Melpomeni Fani1, Tobias Heye1, Guillaume Nicolas1,
Elmar Merkle1, Jean Claude Reubi2, Beat Gloor3, Damian Wild1 &
Emanuel Christ4
1Clinic of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University Basel Hospital,
Basel, Switzerland;2Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of
Pathology, University of Bern, Switzerland;3Department of Visceral
Surgery, University Hospital of Bern, Inselspital, Switzerland;4Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetology and Clinical Nutrition, University Hospital of
Bern, Inselspital, Switzerland.
Purpose
The aim of our study is to compare the detection rate of GLP-1R PET/CT and
GLP-1R  SPECT/CT  in  patients  with  a  biochemically  proven  endogenous
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. Preliminary results of an ongoing study are
reported.
Methods
Thirty-three patients (25 females, 8 males, age range 18-80 years, mean 49 years)
with neuroglycopenic symptoms due to endogenous hyperinsulinemic hypo-
glycemia were enrolled (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02127541).
Results
Previously performed cross-sectional imaging (CT/MRI) was negative or not
conclusive in 25/33 (76%) of patients. 22 patients have been operated. In this
collective, the histological diagnosis of a benign insulinoma was confirmed in
19 patients, one patient had adult islet cell hyperplasia. In one patient both
intraoperative palpation and histological diagnosis did not confirm an insulinoma.
In one patient symptoms of endogenous hypoglycemia ceased postoperative but
histological diagnosis did not confirm the diagnosis. This patient was excluded
from evaluation as the final diagnosis remained unclear. Two patients refused
surgery. Five patients are awaiting surgery. In four patients PET/CT, SPECT/CT
as  well  as  the  previous  performed  conventional  imaging did  not  find  any
suspicious lesion and were thus not operated up to date. In this interim analysis
PET/CT showed an overall pooled sensitivity of 93% SPECT/CT at 72 h showed
an overall pooled sensitivity of 75% PET/CT was the only modality which
correctly identified the area of islet cell hyperplasia (adult nesidioblastosis) within
the pancreas.
Conclusion
Our interims analysis suggests that GLP-1R PET/CT performs better than GLP-
1R SPECT/CT at a lower radiation dose and shorter examination time.
GLP-1R PET/CT will be a useful diagnostic tool in patients where cross sectional
imaging (CT/MRI) fails to localize the insulinoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP590
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP591
Mtor inhibitors responsiveness associates with Akt/Mtor pathway
activation in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
Simona Falletta1, Stefano Partelli2, Corrado Rubini3, Dominik Nann4,
Andrea Doria3, Ilaria Marinoni4, Vanessa Polenta2, Carmelina Di Paquale1,
Ettore Degli Uberti1, Aurel Perren4, Massimo Falconi2 &
Maria Chiara Zatelli1
1Department of Medical Science, Section of Endocrinology & Internal
Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy;2Pancreatic Surgery Unit,
San Raffaele Hospital, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy;
3Department of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health, Polytechnic
University of Marche, Ancona, Italy;4Institut Fur Pathologie, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
Introduction
Medical  therapy  of  Pancreatic  neuroendocrine  tumors
(P-NETs)  may  take
advantage from mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors. However, so
far, the extent of therapeutic response cannot be predicted.
Aim
To investigate the possible predictors of sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors in
P-NETs.
Materials and methods
P-NET primary cultures were treated with IGF1 and/or Everolimus. Cell viability
and caspase activity were evaluated. Protein profiling for PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway  components  was  assessed  by  alpha  screen.  Validation  by  Tissue
microarray and immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on 11 P-NETs.
Molecular and clinico-pathological characteristics of the patients were collected.
Results
Everolimus significantly reduced cell viability and induced apoptosis up to 30%
(Responder; P-NET-R) in 6 P-NETs, where the proliferative and antiapoptotic
effects IGF-1 were blocked by Everolimus. On the contrary, 14 P-NETs were
resistant to Everolimus and IGF-1
treatments
(Non Responder; pNET-NR).
Furthermore, we found that phosphorylated IGF1R, AKT, mTOR and 4EBP1
protein levels were O2 fold higher in P-NET-R as compared to P-NET-NR.
Among the 11 P-NETs analysed by IHC, 2/3 P-NET-R tissues were positive for
p-AKT and p-mTOR, On the contrary, 6/8 P-NET-NR tissues were negative for
p-mTOR independently of the phosphorylation state of p-AKT, confirming alpha
screen data. Furthermore, clinical characteristics associated with responsiveness
to Everolimus in vitro were higher ki67 (R10%) and higher grade (G3).
Conclusions
The lack of response to mTOR inhibitors associates with an inactive mTOR
protein, suggesting that mTOR phosphorylation status assessed by IHC may
represent a predictive marker of responsiveness to mTOR inhibitors. However,
further studies are needed to confirm these data.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP591
EP592
Bone morphogenetic protein signaling as novel therapeutic target in
pheochromocytoma
Andrea Richter, Ines Leinhäuser & Natalia Pellegata
Helmholtzzentrum Munchen, Munich, Germany.
Introduction
Rats affected by the MENX syndrome develop bilateral pheochromocytoma
(PCC) with complete penetrance. Transcriptome profiling of rat PCC identified
Bmp7  (bone  morphogenetic  protein  7)  as  highly  expressed  in  the  tumors.
Interestingly,
72% of human PCCs also showed elevated BMP7 expression.
BMP7 plays pro- or anti-oncogenic roles in cancer in a cell type-dependent
manner. To address the role of Bmp7 in PCC, its level was modulated in PCC cell
lines and functional assays were conducted. The results showed that Bmp7
promotes oncogenic features in PCC.
Methods
We modulated Bmp7 expression and checked for integrin b1 expression. We
knocked-down integrin b1 and performed in vitro functional assays. We treated
PCC cell lines, primary PCC cells and tumor tissues with DMH1, a small
molecule  inhibitor  of  BMP  type  I  receptors.  Following  DMH1
treatment,
functional in vitro assays or immunohistochemistry were performed.
Result
Integrin b1 mediates Bmp7-dependent increase in PCC cell motility. Treatment of
MTT cells with DMH1 suppressed cell proliferation and migration in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Concomitantly, a down regulation of molecular readouts
of active BMP signaling in PCC cells was observed. The treatment of rat primary
PCC cells with DMH1 was associated with a dose-dependent decrease in cell
viability. Isolated rat tumor tissues were inserted into a rotary cell culture system
(RCCS, SyntheconTM) and treated with DMH1. Immunohistochemistry on the
fixed tissues confirmed the downregulation of BMP signaling by the inhibitor.
Conclusion
BMP signaling may represent a novel therapeutic target  in PCC. Pathway
blockade by DMH1 elicits anti-proliferative and anti-migratory responses in PCC
cells in vitro and should in the future be evaluated in PCC models in vivo.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP592
EP593
Prognostic factors of recurrence-free and overall survival in 52 patients
with adrenocortical carcinoma
Karolina M. Nowak1, Radoslaw Samsel2, Andrzej Cichocki2,
Katarzyna Roszkowska-Purska3, Anna Kasperlik-Zaluska1 &
Lucyna Papierska1
1Department of Endocrinology, Centre of Postgraduate Medical Education,
Warsaw, Poland;2Department of Surgery Clinic of Oncology Memorial M.
Sklodowska-Curie Cancer Institute, Warsaw, Poland;3Department of
Patology Memorial M. Sklodowska-Curie Cancer Institute, Warsaw,
Poland.
Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare and very aggressive tumor with poor
prognosis. The aim of the study was to identify prognostic factors of recurrence-
free (RFS) and overall survival (OS) in patients with ACC.
We present a retrospective analysis in 52 patients diagnosed with ACC. A number
of factors both histological and clinical were analyzed. Recurrent disease was
defined  as  a  new  lesion  confirmed  in  imaging.  Kaplan-Meier  method  and
multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression model was performed with
adjustment for sex, age and ENSAT staging as covariates.
The  study  included
36  females  and
16  males  of  median  age
48  and  57
respectively. Forty six patients underwent surgical resection, six had unrespect-
able disease. Forty six patients received adjuvant mitotane. Twenty eight patients
suffered  from  recurrent  disease.  Thirty  four  patients  died  due  to  disease
progression. The 5-year overall survival for stage I, II, III and IV disease was
75, 66.5, 29.2 and 0%, respectively. The median of recurrence-free survival was
24.4 months (1.5-132.8) and 43 months (2.3-165.18) for overall survival. Age,
male sex, stage, mitotic rate O20/50 high power fields, tumor necrosis, tumor
invasion of vessels, neighbouring structure or adjacent organs and time from first
imaging to surgery over 70 days were associated with decreased both RFS and
OS.  Unrespectable  disease,  macroscopically  involved  margins  or  tumor
infiltration of capsule with crossing its border were only related to poor OS.
Ki67, hormonal activity, tumor size, thrombus in vena cava had no influence on
RFS or OS.
Our study indicates a major role of prognostic factors on survival in patients with
ACC. The 5-year survival, median of RFS and OS were worse than previously
reported. Due to the aggressive behavior of ACC and high percentage of relapse
it is crucial to conduct more studies in order to help improving survival.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP593
EP594
Sentinel lymph node biopsy in medullary thyroid microcarcinoma using
methylene blue dye mapping - a pilot study
Radan Dzodic1,2, Nada Santrac1, Merima Goran1, Marko Buta1,2,
Igor Djurisic1, Gordana Pupic3, Ognjen Zivkovic3 & Ivan Markovic1,2
1Institute for Oncology and Radiology of Serbia, Surgical Oncology Clinic,
Belgrade, Serbia;2Medical School, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,
Serbia;3Institute for Oncology and Radiology of Serbia, Department of
Pathology, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
Serum calcitonin level (sCT) is a precise marker for medullary thyroid carcinoma
(MTC). However, lymph node (LN) metastases can be found in lower sCT, as
well, and preoperative ultrasound may provide false negative findings on regional
LNs. The aim was to present original technique of sentinel lymph node (SLN)
biopsy of jugulo-carotid regions, after methylene blue dye mapping procedure,
and its usefulness for selection of clinically N0 patients with MTC for modified
radical neck dissection (MRND).
Materials and methods
From 2007 to 2015th, 14 patients were operated in our surgical clinic due to MTC
with sCT lower than 1000 pg/ml, tumors under or 10 mm in size and clinically
negative regional LNs. Central dissection was done in all patients. SLN mapping was
performed with 0.2-0.5 ml of 1%-methylene blue dye. Levels II and III were
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
explored on both sides, blue stained SLNs were removed and examined by frozen
section analysis. If benign, additional surrounding non-colored LNs were removed
for more precise evaluation. If SLNs were positive, MRND was performed.
Results
One patient had hereditary form of MTC, with bilateral subcentimeter tumors,
while others had sporadic, unilateral MTC. Sporadic MTCs showed no central nor
lateral LN metastases on bilateral SLN biopsy, with no indication for MRND.
Hereditary MTC had central LN metastases, with positive SLNs on both sides, thus
one-time bilateral MRND was performed. This patient had metastases in other
dissected  LNs, as well, and sCT of
200 pg/ml. Frozen  section  and  definite
pathological analysis were 100% match.
Conclusion
SLN  biopsy  after  methylene  blue  dye  injection  can  be  precisely  used  for
intraoperative assessment of lateral LNs. It optimizes surgery for patients with
MTCs, selecting clinically N0, but true positive patients for MRND. This pilot
study is the first reported experience with SLN biopsy of jugulo-carotid regions in
MTC, using methylene blue dye.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP594
EP595
Biochemical assessment of disease control in acromegaly: reappraisal of
the glucose suppression test in somatostatin analogue (SA) treated
patients
Mai C. Arlien-Søborg, Elin Alvarson, Jakob Dal & Jens Otto L. Jørgensen
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
Context
The nadir serum GH level during glucose suppression (OGTT) is recommended
in patients treated by surgery, but not during SA treatment. We have shown that
patients considered controlled by SA don’t suppress serum GH during OGTT and
have  impaired  disease-specific  QoL  as  compared  to  patients  controlled  by
surgery. We hypothesize SA treated patients also don’t suppress GH in response
to mixed meals.
Aim
To compare GH levels during two mixed meals in patients considered controlled
by either surgery alone or SA.
Patients and methods
Patients controlled by surgery alone (nZ22) or SA (nZ12) for R 12 months
were studied twice in the following order: 1) during a 6 h (8-14 h) GH profile
including two standardized mixed meals (at 8 and 12 h), and 2) during a 3 h
(8-11 h) GH profile with OGTT at tZ9 h. At least 6 months elapsed between
each study.
Results
The two groups were comparable at diagnosis as regards gender distribution,
serum GH and IGF-I levels and adenoma size. The meanGS.E.M. IGF-I levels
(mg/l) at study start were 169G13 (surgery) and 197G13 (SA) (PZ0.15). During
profile 1 (mixed meal) no suppression was observed in the SA treated group and
the mean serum GH levels (mg/l) were elevated [1.55G0.77 (SA) vs 0.68G0.48
(surgery) (P!0.0001)]. During profile 2 (OGTT) fasting GH levels (mg/l) were
comparable [1.73G1.30 (SA) vs 1.47G1.57 (surgery) (PZ0.60)], but the SA
group failed to suppress during the OGTT [2.00G0.90 (SA) vs 0.73G1.0
(PZ0.008).
Conclusion
1) Patients controlled by SA don’t suppress GH in response to either OGTT or
mixed meals, 2) This likely implies relatively elevated GH levels during everyday
life in SA patients, 3) We recommend that SA patients are assessed with GH
measurements during an OGTT and hypothesize that this will reveal under
treatment in a substantial proportion of patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP595
EP596
The role of insulin, IGFBP-3, folic acid, 25-OH-D, CA 19-9 and CA 72-4
as potential tumor’s predictors of the gastrointestinal tract in patients
with acromegaly
Olga Knyazeva, Natalya Molitvoslovova & Lydmila Rozhynskaya
Endocrinology Research Center, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Patients  with acromegaly have increased risk of developing tumors of the
gastrointestinal tract. There are some data that insulin, IGFBP-3, folic acid and
25-OH-D may influence the development of these tumors.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Aim
To study the influence of insulin, IGFBP-3, folic acid and 25-OH-D, CA 19-9, CA
72-4 in the development of tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, and the frequency
of neoplasms detection.
Materials and Methods
The  study  included
120  patients  with  acromegaly.  All  patients  underwent
gastroscopy and colonoscopy with biopsy of revealed tumors. The levels of
neoplasms also were studied in all cases.
Results
Neoplasms were found in 43 patients (35.8%). Histologically hyperplastic and
adenomatous  polyps  (24/12),  two  patients  had  villous  and  tubulo-vesicular
adenoma, serrated polyp was found in one case, and five patients had cancer of
stomach and colon. Thus, the frequency of malignant tumors was 4.2%. Insulin
levels higher than 48.6 mU/ml lead to significantly increased risk of developing
tumors. The level of Insulin more than 30.1 mU/ml and diagnosed neoplasm
significantly increased risk of malignancy (sensitivity 80%, specificity 95.2%). In
addition, the level of IGF-GB3R3510 mg/ml was also significantly increased the
risk of malignancy (sensitivity
80%, specificity 98%). The level of CA-19-
9%8.8 U/l also increased the risk of tumors of the gastrointestinal tract in patients
with acromegaly (sensitivity 79.3% and specificity 42.3%). Patients with tumors
and without them were comparable by CA 72-4, folic acid and 25-OH-D levels.
Conclusion
Patients  with  acromegaly  have  the  increased  risk  of  neoplasms  formation,
including malignant tumors. Levels of insulin, IGFBP-3, and CA 19-9 can be used
as the diagnostic criteria of tumors of the gastrointestinal tract in patients with
acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP596
EP597
Phaeochromocytomas and paragangliomas: A comparative study
between sporadic and familial cases in a reference care center in Spain
Guillermo Ropero Luis1, José Ángel Díaz Pérez2, Teresa Ruiz Gracia2,
Martín Cuesta Hernández3, Emilia Gómez Hoyos4, Irene Crespo
Hernández2 & Paz de Miguel Novoa2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Regional Universitario de
Málaga, Málaga, Spain;2Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition,
Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain;3Endocrine Unit, Beaumont
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;4Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
Introduction
Hereditary phaeochromocytoma (PCC) and paraganglioma (PGL) account for
30-35% of cases and have some clinically relevant peculiarities.
Material and methods
Retrospective,  unicentric  cohort  study  that  included  all  genotyped  patients
(nZ36, 27 with PCC and 9 with PGL) diagnosed at Hospital Clínico San Carlos
(Madrid) between 1984 and 2013; 33% were germline mutation carriers (25%
pseudohypoxic [PH] phenotype, 75% MAP-kinase [MAPK] phenotype). Median
follow-up was 98 (IQR 56-141) months. A comparative analysis was performed
using the Mann-Whitney U test, the c2 test and the log-rank test.
Results
Median age at diagnosis was 35.3 (21.9-45.1) years in familial cases, and 64.4
(48.2-73.0)  in  sporadic  cases
(PZ0.02).  Most  of  the  sporadic  cases  were
diagnosed incidentally (61% vs 17%, PZ0.01). Multifocality was more frequent
in familial cases (50% vs 8%, PZ0.01). Recurrent disease after surgery was
present in 40% of familial cases and in no sporadic cases (PZ0.006, median time
73 [30-85] months); it was more frequent in the PH group (67%) than in the
MAPK group (17%). Progression-free survival (PFS) was longer in sporadic
cases (PZ0.009).
Conclusions
Age at diagnosis was significantly lower in familial cases of PCC/PGL. Malignant
behaviour and multifocality were associated with familial cases. Genetic testing
allowed for early diagnosis in asymptomatic mutation carriers, although sporadic
cases had significantly longer PFS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP597
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP598
Norepinephrine transporter (NET) as a predictive marker of response
to PI3K/mTOR inhibition in pheochromocytoma
Ninelia Minaskan1, Misu Lee1, Iina Laitinen2, Rickmer Braren3 &
Natalia S Pellegata1
1Institute of Pathology, Munich, Germany;2Department of Nuclear
Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Munich, Germany;3Institute of
Radiology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Munich, Germany.
Phaeochromocytomas (PCs) are neuroendocrine tumors derived from neural
crest-derived chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla and sympathetic ganglia.
About 10% of all PCs can be malignant.
Currently, there is no effective therapy for malignant PCs.
In many neuroendocrine tumors, including PCs, the PI3K/AKT/mTOR survival
pathway is hyperactivated. Therefore, the inhibition of this signaling cascade may
exert an antitumor effect.
In our study we evaluated the efficacy of a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, BEZ235,
against PC in vivo to avoid the re-activation of upstream AKT signaling following
mTOR inhibition. We took advantage of a unique in vivo model of endogenous
PCs: MENX-effected rats.
Beside antitumor effects of BEZ235 on PCs cells, gene expression analyses of
tumors from rats treated with placebo or with BEZ235 identified the Slc6a2 gene,
encoding  the  norepinephrine  transporter
(NET),  as  being  down-regulated
following drug treatment. NET is responsible for the intracellular re-uptake of
norepinephrine in chromaffin cells. The fact that NET is expressed by PC cells has
been extensively exploited for the functional imaging of these tumors using
radiolabeled norepinephrine analogues. We observed a dose-dependent reduction
of both Slc6a2 (by TaqMan) and NET (by immunohistochemistry) expression in
rat PCs following BEZ235 administration, which associated with decreased
uptake of the radiolabeled norepinephrine analogue 18F-LMI1195 in vivo. To
assess  the  relationship  between  NET  levels  and  response  to  BEZ235,  we
generated a drug-resistant derivative of the MPC cell line. While incubation with
BEZ235 reduced NET expression in MPC cells, no reduction was observed in the
resistant derivative cells, suggesting that decreased NET expression associates
with the ability of PC cells to respond to PI3K/mTOR inhibition.
Altogether,  our  data  demonstrate  that  targeting  PI3K/mTOR  signalling  is
effective against PCs and suggest that NET levels may represent a surrogate
marker of therapy response to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors, which can be monitored by
functional PET imaging.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP598
EP599
Dual targeting of PIK3/AKT/mTOR and IGF1/KRAS/BRAF pathways
in an in vitro model of ovarian cancer: strategies for cell proliferation
control
Cristina de Angelis1, Giacomo Galdiero2, Claudia Pivonello2,
Roberta Patalano2, Giuseppe Bifulco3, Attilio Di Spiezio Sardo4,
Carlo Alviggi3, Giuseppe De Placido3, Annamaria Colao2 &
2
Rosario Pivonello
1IOS and Coleman Medicina Futura Medical Centre, Naples, Italy, Naples,
Italy;2Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Federico II University
of Naples, Naples, Italy;3Dipartimento di Neuroscienze e Scienze
riproduttive ed odontostomatologiche, Federico II University of Naples,
Naples, Italy;4Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, Federico II University of
Naples, Naples, Italy.
Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecological cancer. Debulking surgery
and platinum-based chemotherapy  are the cornerstone of OC management;
however, after a partial initial response, tumors invariably relapse. Therapeutic
approaches should account for interindividual heterogeneity since OC histiotypes
show distinct genetic profile. A2780 cell line has been annotated as high grade
serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC); nevertheless, recent research underlined that the
genetic and molecular background of these cells are much closer to the clear
cell/endometrioid histiotypes, characterized by mutations in PIK3/AKT/mTOR
and  IGF1/KRAS/BRAF  pathways,  that  are  partially  responsible  for  their
chemoresistance. The aim of the current study was to assess the in vitro effects
on  cell  proliferation  of  the  mTORC1
inhibitor  everolimus,  the  mTORC1/
mTORC2 inhibitor OSI027 and the IGF1-R inhibitor OSI906, alone and in
combinations, in A2780 cells. Dose-time response curves were obtained in A2780
treated  for
24,
48,  and
72
hours  and
6
days  with  compounds  given  at
concentrations  from
1 mM to 1 pM. Everolimus significantly inhibited cell
proliferation  in a dose-time dependent manner
(maximum inhibition  95%).
OSI027 significantly inhibited cell proliferation at the highest concentrations of
1 mM and 100 nM (maximum inhibition
95%).  OSI906
displayed  a  non-
significant dose dependent trend in the inhibition of cell proliferation. Cells
were then treated with combinations of drugs administered at intermediate
concentrations: everolimus at 100 pM, 1 pM and 10 fM was combined with
OSI906 at 100 nM, 10 nM and 1 nM; OSI027 and OSI906 were combined at
100 nM, 10 nM and 1 nM. All the co-treatments showed a higher inhibitory effect
on cell proliferation compared to single compounds. These preliminary results
suggested that the dual targeting of PIK3/AKT/mTOR and IGF1/KRAS/BRAF
pathways may be a potentially effective approach to the management of OC.
Additional experiments are being performed to further characterize the interplay
between these pathways in OC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP599
EP600
Immunohistochemical study of AuroraB proves association with
differentiation and expression of crucial progression markers in
gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms
Yawen Wang1,2,5, Franziska Briest1,2,3, Sonja Greshake1,2, Adrian Lock1,2,
Dieter Horsch1,2,3, Christian Arnold1,2,4, Erika Berg1,2, Michael Hummel1,2,
Britta Siegmund1,2 & Patricia Grabowski1,2,3
1Charité, Berlin, Germany;2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Freie Universitat (FU), Berlin, Germany;3Zentralklinik bad Berka, Bad
Berka, Germany;4Klinikum Friedrichshafen, Friedrichshafen, Germany;
5Vivantes Klinikum Friedrichshain, Berlin, Germany.
Objective
Gastroenteropancreatic  neuroendocrine  neoplasm
(GEP-NENs)  are  rare  and
heterogeneous in their tumor biology. Therapeutic options to prevent growth and
dissemination are still not satisfactory. As shown previously, survivin and aurora
kinases (members of the mitotic chromosomal passenger complex) play a role in
cell cycle progression; FOXM1 is a transcription factor that regulates G2/M
progression and is associated with grading and metastasis in GEP-NENs. Aurora
kinases, survivin and Ki-67 have been described as transcriptional targets of
FOXM1. Here, we immunohistochemically analyzed this protein network as
potential tumor markers.
Methods
Tumor tissues from 128 patients were studied immunohistochemically with anti-
survivin, anti-FOXM1, anti-STAT3, and AIM 1 (auroraB) antibody (O5%:
positive). The expression pattern war correlated with follow up data such as tumor
progression, time of death and cause of death.
Results
The immunohistochemical analysis of auroraB revealed an association with
survivin, as both nuclear scores were positively correlated (PZ0.000). We further
found associations with the expression of STAT3. AuroraB-expression was
related to high FOXM1 expression (PZ0.046). In accordance with the strong
association of survivin/FOXM1 expression with grading and differentiation, we
found cytosolic AuroraB almost exclusively in G1/G2 tumors, nuclear AuroraB
expression in G3 tumors (both: PZ0.000).
Conclusion
Our study shows that the expression of AuroraB is associated with differentiation,
progression and aggressiveness of GEP-NENs. The association of AuroraB with
STAT3, which is involved in tumor-stroma communication, deserves further
investigation. AuroraB is strongly associated with other markers of the mitosis
regulatory network, including survivin, FOXM1 and Ki-67. We therefore propose
to include this set of proliferation markers into routine diagnostics in order to
individualize therapeutic strategies in this tumor entity in the future.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP600
EP601
Adrenal incidentalomas: functionality study
Ángel Rebollo-Roman, Paloma Moreno-Moreno, María-Inmaculada Prior-
Sánchez, Rodrigo Bahamondes-Opazo, Aura-Dulcinea Herrera-Martínez,
Ana Barrera-Martín & María-Ángeles Gálvez-Moreno
Hospital Reina Sofía Endocrinology Service, Córdoba, Spain.
Introduction
Due to the widespread use of imaging studies performed in hospitalised patients
for other indications, adrenal incidentalomas (AI) are frequent findings in the
everyday clinical practice. The objective of this research is to describe the
prevalence of hormonally active and malignant AI.
Patients and methods
Observational retrospective study of a cohort of patients who consulted in the
Endocrinology service between 2005 and 2015 because of an AI. The statistical
analysis was performed with SPSS 19th version for Windows.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
Two hundred and one patients presented with an AI. Seventy four of them had
multiple AI so that the number of AI analysed was 239. The median age of the
patients was 58.85G11.55 years, 74.1% of which were older than 50. 56.9% of
them were women.
Imaging  study where  the AI was  found: 73.6%  CT scan,  40%  abdominal
ultrasonography, 7.1% MRI, 0.8% PET and 0.4% surgical finding. Size: 29.36G
20.96 mm. 54.4% of the masses were located in the left adrenal gland. After the
biochemical testing for hormone production and radiology study were conducted,
71.6% of the AI were non-functioning, 14.4% subclinical Cushing’s syndrome
6.8% myelolipoma, 3.2% Cushing’s syndrome, 1.4% pheochromocytoma, 1.4%
adrenal cancer, 0.9% hematoma, 0.5% metastatic masses. Surgical treatment was
performed in 37 patients (15.5%). The size of the mass was the most frequent
reason for the intervention (36.7% of the AI removed), followed by radiological
findings suggestive of malignancy (26.7%), growing AI (13.3%), Cushing’s
syndrome
(13.3%),  pheochromocytoma
(6.7%)  and  history  of  previous
malignancy (3.3%).
Conclusions
The AI is more frequent in women and in patients in the fifth decade of life. In our
study, the predominant location was the left adrenal gland. Most of the AI studied
were non-functional, being the percentage of hormonally active masses found
similar as previous and larger studies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP601
EP602
Synergistic anti-tumour effects of 13-cis retinoic acid and lovastatin in
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour (BON1) cells through enhanced
EGFR inhibition
Svenja Nolting1, Elke Tatjana Aristizabal Prada1, Michael Lauseker2,
Julian Maurer1, Gerald Spottl1, Burkhard Goke3, Karel Pacak4 &
Ashley Grossman5
1Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of the LMU,
Campus Grosshadern, Munich, Germany;2Institut fur Medizinische
Informationsverarbeitung, Biometrie und Epidemiologie (IBE), Munich,
Germany;3University-Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany;
4National Institutes of Health, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, USA;5Churchill
Hospital, University of Oxford, Department of Endocrinology, Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Oxford, UK.
Introduction
In our previous studies we found that the combination of 13-cis retinoic acid
(13cRA)  and  lovastatin  significantly  reduced  tumour  growth  in  a  mouse
phaeochromocytoma allograft model, with the lowest microvessel density in
the combination-treated tumours. We have now investigated the effect of 13cRA
plus lovastatin on neuroendocrine (BON1, H727) and non-endocrine tumour
(HepG2, Huh7) cell viability and signalling pathways (EGFR, AKT, ERK,
p70S6K) to elucidate the underlying mechanism of action.
Methods
Cell  viability  was  assessed  with  the  MTS  assay,  the  effect  on  signalling
pathways by Western blotting. For cell viability data, the multiple-comparison
Kruskal-Wallis-Test  was  used,  followed  by  pairwise  comparisons  with  the
Mann-Whitney-Test.  Interaction  effects  were  analysed  with  Linear-Mixed-
Effects-Models. Statistical significance was defined at P%0.05.
Results
3.75 mM or 7.5 mM 13cRA significantly reduced endocrine and non-endocrine
tumour cell viability (P%0.001). The combination of 10 mM lovastatin plus
7.5 mM 13cRA showed synergistic inhibition of BON1 cell viability (P%0.05).
We found similar results in the non-endocrine tumour cells (P%0.01). In H727
cells,
10 mM  lovastatin  plus  3.75 mM  or  7.5 mM 13cRA  significantly more
strongly reduced cell viability than each drug separately (P%0.05), but this effect
was not synergistic. In BON1, HepG2 and Huh7 cells, combination-treatment
decreased pEGFR by more than 50% relative to each drug separately, and by
more than 80% relative to the untreated control. This effect on pEGFR was less
pronounced in H727 cells. In all cell lines investigated, combination treatment
reduced pAKT by more than 50% compared to each drug separately, and strongly
up-regulated pERK relative to the control.
Conclusion
We found a synergistic effect of 13cRA plus lovastatin in BON1 cells at clinically
relevant doses, associated with enhanced EGFR inhibition. This is compatible
with our recent in vivo data in a phaeochromocytoma allograft model showing
slowest tumour growth and lowest microvessel density after 13cRA/lovastatin-
treatment suggesting a novel potentially highly effective therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP602
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP603
Medullary Thyroid Cancer: a comparative study between sporadic and
familial cases in a reference care center in Spain
Guillermo Ropero Luis1, José Ángel Díaz Pérez2, Emilia Gómez Hoyos3,
Martín Cuesta Hernández4, Irene Crespo Hernández2, Teresa Ruiz Gracia2
& Paz de Miguel Novoa2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Regional Universitario de
Málaga, Málaga, Spain;2Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition,
Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain;3Department of Endocrinology
and Nutrition, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, Valladolid,
Spain;4Endocrine Unit, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
Introduction
Hereditary Medullary Thyroid Cancer (MTC) accounts for 20-30% of cases and
has some clinically relevant peculiarities.
Material and methods
Retrospective, unicentric cohort study that included all genotyped patients with
MTC (nZ48) diagnosed at Hospital Clínico San Carlos (Madrid) between 1984-
2013; 42% were germline mutation carriers (45% moderate risk (category MOD),
45% high risk (category H), 10% highest risk (category HST)). Median follow-up
was 61 (IQR 22-104) months. A comparative analysis was performed using the
Student’s t-test, the c2 test and the log-rank test.
Results
Mean age at diagnosis was 37.6 (S.D. 20.4) years in familial cases, and 62.5 (12.2) in
sporadic cases (P!.001); local or distant metastases were present in 44% of familial
cases and 61% of sporadic cases (PZNS). Most of the familial cases (55%) were
asymptomatic  and  diagnosed  after  genetic  screening.  Six  months  after  total
thyroidectomy, 24% of sporadic cases and no familial cases showed progression.
During follow-up, 27% of sporadic cases and 6% of familial cases developed distant
metastases (median time 30 (8-56) months). Progression-free survival (PFS) and
distant metastases-free survival (DMFS) were longer in familial cases (PZNS).
Attributable mortality due to MTC was 23% in sporadic cases and 0% in familial
cases; overall survival (OS) was longer in familial cases (PZ0.03).
Conclusions
Age at diagnosis was significantly lower in familial cases of MTC. Genetic testing
allowed for early diagnosis in asymptomatic mutation carriers, therefore familial
cases had a better outcome and a longer survival.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP603
EP604
Evaluation of differential genes expression of ARHI, FAM129A,
KCNQ1, STT3A, CDH1, TIMP3, TFF3 and PTEN in thyroid tissue
lesions and in biopsies obtained intraoperatively
Michał Kusin´ ski1, Karolina H Czarnecka2, Kamila Soboska2,
Monika Migdalska-Se˛k2, Dorota Pastuszak-Lewandoska2, Ewa Nawrot2,
Krzysztof Kuzdak1 & Ewa Brzezian´ ska-Lasota2
1Department of Endocrine, General and Vascular Surgery, Chair of
Endocrinology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, lodzkie, Poland;
2Department of Molecular Bases of Medicine, I Chair of Internal Medicine,
Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, lodzkie, Poland.
Malignant transformation of the thyroid follicular cell in nodular goiter (NG) can
lead to development of follicular adenoma (FA) or progression into: papillary
thyroid carcinoma (PTC) or thyroid follicular cancer (FTC). Distinguishing
follicular cell-derived thyroid tumors (FCDT) from NG on the molecular level
can be especially helpful for underdetermined cytology (Bethesda III-IV) or
FNAB with ‘follicular neoplasm’.
Aim
Comparison of expression levels of ARHI, FAM129A, KCNQ1, STT3A, CDH1,
TIMP3, TFF3 and PTEN genes - as candidate biomarkers in differentiation of
FCDT - in intraoperative FNAB and in mass of lesion.
Material
RNA isolated from FNAB of the indicated nodule and thyroid tissue neoplasms
(obtained during total tyroidectomy) from 56 patients with preoperative FNAB
diagnosis: ‘follicular neoplasm’/PTC. Final diagnoses: FA (nZ6), PTC (nZ22),
FTC (nZ5) and NG (nZ23).
Methods
RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis, mRNA expression evaluation (RQ), V600E
BRAF mutation analysis.
Results
From  analysed  genes  TFF3,  FAM129A,  KCNQ1,  STT3A  and  CDH1  were
expressed on the comparable level in tumor tissue and in biopsies. Expression of
KCNQ1  was  elevated  in NG,  when  compared  to  group  of  cancer  lesions.
Expression of FAM129A, CDH1 were the highest in PTC, and TFF3 in FTC.
Differences in expression levels of TIMP3, ARHI and PTEN were observed
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
between cancer tissue and FNAB, what exclude the possibility of using these
genes as differentiating markers for biopsies. ARHI and PTEN expression was
significantly elevated in FNAB and TIMP3 was decreased in FNAB, when
compared to cancer tissues. BRAF mutations V600E/V600A were observed in six
patients, no correlation with gene expression or pathological features.
Conclusions
TFF3, FAM129A, KCNQ1, STT3A and CDH1 gene expression analysis in biopsy
flushes may have diagnostic potential due to the expression on comparable levels
in thyroid nodule biopsy and thyroid lesions after thyroidectomy. Search for new
molecular diagnostic markers is essential especially for the FNAB with ‘follicular
neoplasm’.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP604
EP605
Real life data on Lanreotide Autogel in the treatment of patients
with neuroendocrine tumors (NET) - an interim analysis from
SOPRANo study
Anja Rinke1, Lothar Muller2, Christoph Maintz3, Claus Bolling4,
Markus Raderer5, Mirjam Christ-Crain6, Philipp Hoffmanns7,
Vitali Chevts7, Aude Houchard8 & Stephan Petersenn9
1Klinik fur Gastroenterologie, Endokrinologie und Stoffwechselerkrankun-
gen, Universitatsklinikum Gießen-Marburg, Marburg, Germany;2Praxis fur
Onkologie Leer-Emden-Papenburg, Leer, Germany;3Hämatologisch-
Onkologische Praxis, Wurselen, Germany;4AGAPLESION- Markus
Krankenhaus, Frankfurt am Main, Germany;5AKH Wien, Wien, Austria;
6Klinik fur Endokrinologie; Universitatsspital Basel; Universitat Basel,
Basel, Switzerland;7Ipsen Pharma GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany;8Ipsen
Pharma, Boulogne-Billancourt, France;9ENDOC - Center for Endocrine
Tumors, Hamburg, Germany.
Introduction
This non-interventional study assesses real-life use and potential predictive
parameters for lanreotide (LAN) in pts with either acromegaly (ACRO) or NET
over a period of 24 months. We present a pre-specified interim analysis after first
6 months of therapy.
Methods
The primary objective is to evaluate the long term treatment response under LAN
and to correlate it with early changes of biochemical markers. The planned
sample size is 152 (76 ACRO and 76 NET) pts. Pts/disease characteristics, disease
markers, treatment effectiveness are also analysed. The baseline (except CgA)
and safety data are presented on
50 enrolled NET pts, other analyses are
performed on the main NET analysis population (nZ37).
Results
At baseline, median (G S.D.) age and duration of NET were 68.5 (G13.2) and 0.9
(G5.4) yrs, median (G S.D.) CgA level was 393.9% of ULN (G1409.7). Main
tumor locations included ileum (46%) and pancreas (22%); 90% of pts had
metastases. G1 and G2 tumors were observed in 51% and 43% respectively, G3
in 6%. Scintigraphy was positive in 58% pts. 89% of pts had prior therapy (88%
surgery, 22% biotherapy). After first 6 months of therapy 70% and 85% of pts
showed stability or improvement of carcinoid syndrome/diarrhea and flush,
respectively. 22 adverse events (AEs) were reported in 16 pts (32%), wherefrom
11  pts  developed  a  total  of
16  serious  AEs
(15
unrelated  and
1 related
(choledocholithiasis)).
Conclusions
The study reflects the routine use of LAN in advanced/metastatic NET. This
interim  analysis  shows  favorable  effectiveness  with  stabilization  of  disease
related symptoms and good tolerability of LAN.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP605
EP606
Novel mutations p.V220E and c.30GOT in menin gene are associated
with hereditary predisposition to multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
Katarzyna Ziemnicka, Bartlomiej Budny, Pawel Gut, Aleksandra Hernik,
Olena Leitgeber-Dominiczak, Marcin Siudzinski, Maria Gryczynska,
Adam Janicki & Marek Ruchala
Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Diseases, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Introduction
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominant condition
characterized by varying combinations of endocrine tumors and commonly
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
accompanying hyperplasia within the parathyroid gland, anterior pituitary and
gastrointestinal tract. Heterozygous germline mutation of the tumor suppressor
gene MEN1 is the most common cause of the disease. Molecular genetic testing
of menin gene, in which mutation is known to cause MEN1 syndrome, detects
pathogenic  variants  in  approximately
80%-90%  of  probands  with  familial
background and in approximately 65% of sporadically occurring cases.
Aims
Identification and characterization of pathogenic mutations in 2 separate families
presenting symptoms of MEN1.
Methods
Detailed family history of both pedigrees was investigated and followed up. In
Family 1, pituitary tumor, parathyroid gland adenoma and neuroendocrine tumor
appeared. The Family 2 presented with parathyroid gland adenoma. Genomic
DNA was extracted by conventional methods from peripheral leukocytes. The
entire coding sequence, together with the intron-flanking sequences of the MEN1
gene was analyzed.
Results
In both families, novel pathogenic mutations were identified. The Family 1 is
affected by the missense mutation leading to single AA substitution VOE at
position 220. In the Family 2, a novel splice site mutation c.30GOT was revealed.
Both  mutations and locations  were searched in the literature and genomic
databases but so far no such abnormalities were reported.
Conclusions
Patients who present solid components of potential MEN1 syndrome should be
routinely screened for genetic abnormalities. There is limited understanding of
tumor biology, behavior, and heterogeneous clinical presentation in MEN1.
Abundance of genetic alterations in menin as well as lack of mutational hot spots,
prompt the usage of wider genetic analysis including other genes. This work also
indicate  the  necessity  of  thorough  analysis  of  synonymous  alterations  as
potentially pathogenic splice site mutations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP606
EP607
Glucagon-like-1 Receptor imaging specifically localizes insulinomas in
patients with Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1 (MEN-1)
Kwadwo Antwi1, Melpomeni Fani1, Tobias Heye1, Guillaume Nicolas1,
Elmar Merkle1, François Pattou2, Ashley Grossmann3, Philippe Chanson4,
Jean Claude Reubi5, Beat Gloor6, Damian Wild1 & Emanuel Christ7
1Clinic of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University of Basel Hsopital,
Switzerland;2Department of General and Endocrine Surgery, Lille
University Hospital, France;3Oxford Centre of Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolism, University of Oxford, UK;4Division of Endocrinology,
Hospital Bicetre and University Pari XI, France;5Division of Experimental
Pathology, University of Bern, Switzerland;6Department of Visceral
Surgery, University Hospital of Bern, Inselspital, Switzerland;7Division of
Diabetology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University Hospital of Bern,
Inselspital, Switzerland.
Introduction
Surgery is often the only treatment option that can effectively treat patients with
insulinoma in MEN-1. However, the surgical intervention should be limited as
surgery can not cure patients with MEN-1. It is, therefore, mandatory to correctly
localize insulin secreting tumors from other neuroendocrine tumors.
Materials and Methods
In this report we include 6 patients with proven endogenous hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia  and  neuroglycopenia  in  the  context  of  MEN-1.  All  patients
received abdominal SPECT/CT after the injection of a standard activity of
111In-Exendin-4. Four patients underwent additional imaging with a standardized
contrast media enhanced 3T MRI and a68Ga-DOTA-exendin-4 PET/CT scan as
part of the study.
Results
Six patients (4 females and 2 males) were included (age range 18-49 years). Until
today 5 of 6 patients have been operated. One patient refuses surgery until today.
In the operated patients conventional imaging revealed a total of 11 suspicious
pancreatic or peripancreatic lesions. PET/CT and SPECT/CT imaging together
revealed 6 lesions with a high expression of Glucagon-like Peptide-1 receptors
(GLP-1R) suspicious for an insulinoma. Based on the GLP-1R imaging all
insulinoma suspicious lesions were surgically removed. Histology confirmed that
all  GLP-1
receptor  positive  lesions  were  insulinomas  and  all  five  patients
presented with normalized postoperative blood sugar levels.
Conclusion
Adding  GLP-1R  imaging  to  conventional  imaging  is  a  helpful  tool  in
differentiating  insulinomas  from  other  pancreatic  islet  tumors  expressed  in
MEN-1 patient and may guide the surgical intervention.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP607
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP608
Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging in pituitary apoplexy
Dhiya eddine Bellarbi, Said Azzoug, Leyla Rabehi, Brahim Terki &
Farida Chentli
Department of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Bab El Oued Teaching
Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Introduction
Pituitary apoplexy is a rare endocrine emergency characterized by the sudden
onset  of  severe  headaches,  vomiting,  visual  abnormalities  and  pituitary
dysfunction secondary to an acute hemorrhage or infarction within a pituitary
adenoma.
Subjects and methods
We report a retrospective study from 2000 to 2014 of 23 cases with pituitary
apoplexy. Their mean age was 38.7 years G10 years, with a male to female ratio
of 2:1. All patients benefited Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Results
Pituitary
(MRI) showed macroadenomas in all cases. These macroadenomas
invade the optical chiasma in 87%, the cavernous sinuses in 48%, the sphenoidal
sinus in 39% and have multidirectional extension in 22%. Areas of intratumoral
hemorrhage were evident on MRI in 94% leading to the positive diagnosis of
pituitary  apoplexy  which  confirms  the  Importance  of  pituitary  MRI  when
investigating pituitary apoplexy.
Conclusion
Pituitary  apoplexy  is  a  rare  life-threatening  clinical  syndrome  caused  by
infarction  or  hemorrhage  within  a  pituitary  adenoma.  Magnetic  resonance
imaging (MRI) is the investigation of choice and has been shown to confirm the
diagnosis in 94% of patients which is compatible with guidelines and results of
the literature. Once pituitary apoplexy is diagnosed a multidisciplinary team
approach is mandatory in order to improve the outcome of this condition.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP608
EP609
Craniopharyngioma registry for adult patients, an initiative of the
pituitary workgroup of the DGE
Klaus Christian Mende1, Anna Kopczak4, Timo Deutschbein5,
Michael Droste6, Jurgen Honegger3, Gunther Stalla4, Herrmann Muller7,
Stephan Petersenn2 & Jorg Flitsch1
1Hamburg Medical Center, Department of Neurosurgery, Hamburg,
Germany;2ENDOC, Hamburg, Germany;3Tubingen University,
Tuebingen, Germany;4Max-Planck Institute for Psychiatry, Munich,
Germany;5Wurzburg University, Department of Medicine I, Wurzburg,
Germany;6Praxis fur Endokrinologie und Diabetologie in Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany;7Oldeburg University, Department of Pediatrics,
Oldenburg, Germany.
Introduction and Objective
Adult craniopharyngioma as a rare neoplasm of the central nervous system is still
very  poorly  understood.  The  clinical  implications  for  affected  patients  are
numerous, ranging from endocrine dysfunction to visual loss and neurological
impairment. Although the progress of this tumor entity is slow by nature, affected
patients often suffer from multiple symptoms even after successful treatment with
a strong impact on their individual quality of life. In order to achieve a better
understanding of the course of the illness and the effect of modern treatment
options a registry for long-term observation of these patients is introduced by the
pituitary workgroup of the DGE.
Material and Methods
Based on the childhood craniopharyngioma registry already in place in Germany,
modified case report forms (CRF) were developed to provide a better fit for
disease related problems in the adult population. A standardized evaluation of the
patients  including  MRI  and  CT  Scans  is  performed,  where  location  and
dimensions as well as mass effects of the tumor are assessed. Each patient is
requested to regularly fill out standardized QoL questionaires. Regular follow ups,
beginning
6
months  postoperative  and  after  that  period  according  to  the
endocrinologist/neurosurgeon in charge shall ensure detailed data acquisition.
Results
So far, 10 prospective patients from a single institution have been enrolled since
April 2015 (2 male, 8 female, mean age 46 y, range 27 y-69 y, mean BMI 24.2,
range 17.7-34.7, 50% (nZ3) adamantinous and 50% (nZ3) papillary tumors, the
remaining tumors were not yet classified.
Conclusion
7 centers are recruiting, 1 is still awaiting approval by their ethics committee
Further participation by other treatment centers is greatly appreciated in order to
achieve  a  better  understanding  of  adult  craniopharyngioma  and  to  further
optimize our patients’ treatment and life quality in the future.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP609
EP610
Effect of 17b-estradiol on the expression of cytochrome P450 1A1 gene
via an estrogen receptor dependent pathway in cellular and xenografted
ovarian cancer models
Ryeo-Eun Go & Kyung-Chul Choi
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1 plays a major role in the metabolic activation of
procarcinogens to carcinogens via aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) pathway. In
estrogen responsive cancers, 17b-estradiol (E2) may influence on AhR dependent
expression of CYP1 family via the interaction between estrogen receptor (ER)
and AhR. In the present study, the effect of E2/ER on the expression of AhR and
CYP1A1 genes was investigated for BG-1 ovarian cancer expressing ER. In
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR and western blot analysis, mRNA level of AhR
was not altered, but its protein level was increased by TCDD or E2. The
transcriptional and translational levels of CYP1A1 appeared to be increased by
TCDD or E2. The increased expression of AhR and CYP1A1 induced by E2 was
restored to the control level by the co-treatment of ICI 182,780, indicating that E2
induced the protein expression of AhR and CYP1A1 like TCDD via an ER
dependent pathway. In an in vivo xenograft mouse model transplanted with BG-1
cells, the protein levels of AhR and CYP1A1 of tumor masses were also increased
by E2 or TCDD. Taken together, these results indicate that E2 may promote AhR
dependent expression of CYP1A1 via ER dependent pathway in BG-1 ovarian
cancer expressing ER in the absence of TCDD, an agonist of AhR. The relevance
of E2 and ER in CYP1A1 activation of estrogen responsive cancers may be
targeted for developing more effective cancer treatments.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP610
EP611
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in patients with Cushing’s syndrome
Feyzi Gokosmanoglu1, Aygul Guzel2, Elif Kılıc Kan1 & Hulusi Atmaca1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism Ondokuz Mayis University
Medical School, Samsun, Turkey;2Department of Pulmonary Medicine
Ondokuz Mayis University Medical School, Samsun, Turkey.
Aim
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) has been studied rarely in patients
with Cushing’s syndrome. We investigated the possible association between
Cushıng’s syndrome and OSAS in this study.
Method
Thirty female patients with newly diagnosed Cushing’s syndrome and 30 female
obese control subjects were included in this study. All the participants were
evaluated by polysomnography. OSAS was defined as apneahypopnea index
(AHI) of R5 events/hour. Body mass index (BMI) of the subjects was recorded
and insulin resistance were calculated by HOMA score.
Results
The mean age and BMI of patients with Cushing’s syndrome and control subjects
were similar. However, the mean fasting glucose, HOMA score and apnoea-
hypopnoea index were higher in patients with Cushing’s syndrome compared to
the control obese subjects (Table 1). 42% of patients with Cushıng’s syndrome
and 10% of control subjects had OSAS.
Conclusion
The risk of OSAS increased in patients with Cushing’s syndrome, compared to
control subjects with similar age and BMI. Insulin resistance and hypercortiso-
lemia may have a meaningful role for this increment. Cushing’s syndrome is a
strong risk factor in the development of OSAS. Therefore Cushing’s syndrome
should be excluded in patients with OSAS and vice versa.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP611
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP612
Human endometrial adenocarcinoma: growth hormone involvement in
cancer chemoresistance
Erica Gentilin, Carmelina Di Pasquale, Katiuscia Benfini, Simona Falletta,
Eleonora Riva, Ettore degli Uberti & Maria Chiara Zatelli
Section of Endocrinology and Internal Medicne, Department Medical
Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
Introduction
It is known that growth hormone (GH) may influence neoplastic development of
endometrial epithelium. GH is produced by normal and neoplastic endometrial
cells and elevated levels have been observed in endometrial epithelium of
patients with endometriosis and endometrial adenocarcinoma (EA). Moreover,
endometrium  cancer  is  one  of  the  most  occurring  tumors  in  acromegalic
patients. Furthermore, autocrine GH increases the oncogenicity of EA cells and
is considered fundamental in neoplastic progression. Since chemoresistance
often develops in advanced EA, we aimed at investigating whether GH might
influence the development of chemoresistance to drugs routinely employed in
EA treatment.
Description of methods
To this aim we employed two EA cell lines: HEC-1-A and AN3 CA cells. Cell
viability and caspase activation were assessed by CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell
Viability Assay (Promega) and Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay (Promega), respectively.
The expression of protein chinase C delta (PRKCD) was investigated by Western-
blotting.
Results
We  demonstrated  that  GH  increases  the  viability  of  EA  cell  lines,  while
doxorubicin, cisplatin and paclitaxel significantly reduce this parameter. GH was
capable to blunt the effects of doxorubicin and cisplatin, but did not influence
paclitaxel effects on cell viability. GH also protects EA cells from caspase
activation induced by doxorubicin and cisplatin. In addition, doxorubicin and
cisplatin induce PRKCD expression, an effect counteracted by GH.
Conclusion
All together our results suggest that GH may contribute to EA chemoresistance by
interfering with apoptotic mechanisms. This may provide new insights on novel
therapies against EA chemoresistant aggressive tumors.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP612
EP613
Silent incidental adrenal pheochromocytoma
Asma Bettaibi1, Manel Jemel1, Kamel Ktari2, Hela Marmouch1,
Hanen Sayedi1, Sameh Graja1, Hammadi Saad2 & Ines Khochtali1
1Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine in Fattouma
Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia;2Department of Urologic
Surgery in Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia.
Introduction
The widespread use of abdominal ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has led to a predictable rise in the discovery
of incidental adrenal lesions, some of which will be silent pheochromocytoma.
Thus,  about  ten  en  percent  of  pheochromocytoma  cases  were  diagnosed
incidentally.
Methods
We studied retrospectively the notes of 23 patients with histologically confirmed
pheochromocytom. Demographic information, pre-existing medical conditions,
and the presence of classic pheochromocytoma symptoms (headache, sweating,
palpitations, febrile sense, or episodic hypertension) were recorded. The aim of
our study was to investigate the clinical characteristics and functional status of
those who were asymptomatic.
Results
We recorded seven patients with silent pheochromocytoma (30% of confirmed
pheochromocytoma). Mean patient age at presentation was 39G11 years. The
seven patients had unilateral enlargement on the left side. The Average maximum
tumor diameter, as detected by CT was 4.2G0.9 cm. Mean Washout on delayed
enhanced CT was 64G14%. All the adrenal masses were heterogeneous and
necrotic in 4 cases. The urine fractionated metanephrine measurements were
elevated at least 2 to 4 times above normal levels in 5 cases.
Conclusion
Every  incidentally  discovered  adrenal  mass  should  be  investigated  for
pheochromocytoma even in the lack of symptoms. The literature indicates that
incidental pheochromocytoma cases that are smaller than 1 cm have no clinical
symptoms. Rarely, some large pheochromocytoma cases do not show any clinical
symptoms but in our study the size of the adrenal masses is greater. Sublaboratory
pheochromocytoma are rare. CT can show features of suspicious morphology
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(calcifications,  necrotic  or  cystic  changes,  and  inhomogeneity)  used  as  a
screening tool for pheochromocytoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP613
EP614
Nestin and Klotho protein expression in neuroendocrine tumors
of the lung
Barbara Bromin´ ska1, Piotr Gabryel2, Donata Jarmołowska-Jurczyszyn3,
Andrzej Kluk3, Kosma Wolin´ ski1, Maciej Trojanowski4,
Rafał Czepczyn´ski1, Wojciech Dyszkiewicz2 & Marek Ruchała1
1Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine,
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland;2Department of Thoracic
Surgery, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland;
3Department of Clinical Pathology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland;4Greater Poland Cancer Center, Department of
Epidemiology and Cancer Prevention, Poznan, Poland.
Introduction
Neuroendocrine tumors of the lungs comprise 20% of primary lung tumors.
Nestin is an intermediate filament protein, expressed in stem cells during fetal
development.  It  is  also  described  as  a  potential  cancer  stem  cell  marker,
angiogenesis marker and indicator of poorer survival probability for patients with
some  types  of  malignancies.  Adversely,  Klotho  gene  is  a  potential  tumor
suppressor. Aberrant expression of Klotho have been recently noticed in a number
of cancers. The knowledge of neuroendocrine tumors of the lung is scarce, so that
in our study we aim at finding a marker which can possibly be used to establish
prognosis and help to adjust the treatment to the type and stage of tumor.
Methods
We assessed immunohistochemically the expression of nestin and Klotho in 40
patients: in 20 cases of large cell neuroendocrine cancer (LCNEC), and in 20
cases  of  carcinoid  tumors.  We  retrospectively  reviewed  patient  charts  and
analyzed multiple variables like tumor size, metastases and overall survival time.
Results
We did not disclose any correlation between Klotho, nestin expression and Ki-67,
initial tumor size, TNM stage in carcinoid tumors. In LCNEC there was no
correlation between Klotho,  nestin expression and overall survival time or
metastases. Nestin expression was correlated with the patient’s age in LCNEC
group (PZ0.048, rZK0.44). When comparing the level of expression of Klotho
in  carcinoids  and  LCNEC,  it  was  significantly  higher  in  the  first  group
(P!0.0001). Additionally, nestin expression was more pronounced in LCNEC
then carcinoids (P!0.0080).
Conclusion
Carcinoids usually characterized by indolent clinical behavior are characterized
by higher Klotho expression, then LCNEC. Adversely, nestin expression is more
pronounced in aggressive LCNEC. It points to a conclusion that, both Klotho and
nestin might be useful as a possible biomarkers. Further studies, on a larger group
of patients should be conducted.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP614
EP615
Genetic predisposition to breast cancer occurring in a
male-to-female transsexual patient
Iulia Potorac1, Vinciane Corman1, Florence Manto1, Sarah Dassy2,
Karin Segers1, Albert Thiry1, Vincent Bours1, Adrian F Daly1 &
Albert Beckers1
1CHU Liege, Universite de Liege, Liege, Belgium;2St-Nikolaus Hospital,
Eupen, Belgium.
Introduction
Breast cancer affects less than 1% of all male cancer patients. In 5-20% of cases,
genetic predisposition is involved, mostly due to mutations of the BRCA2 gene.
Hormonal imbalance between oestrogens and androgens is another predisposing
factor. Male-to-female (MtF) transsexual patients usually undergo long-term
cross-sex  hormone  therapy,  which  could  expose  them  to  higher  risks  of
developing hormonally-dependent cancers.
We report the case of a MtF transsexual patient diagnosed with breast cancer.
A pathogenic BRCA2 mutation was found in the patient and their family.
Case report
Diagnosed with sexual identity dysphoria, the patient sought endocrine treatment
at the age of 46 in order to start hormonal therapy. For 7 years, the patient was
administered  anti-androgens  associated  with  oestrogens.  The  physical
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
transformation was found satisfactory by the patient and the treatment was
followed unremarkably. After
7 years, a routine mammography revealed a
suspicious  region  with  microcalcifications  on  the  right  breast.  Biopsy  was
performed and the analysis found a high grade ductal in situ carcinoma without
obvious signs of infiltration. Hormone therapy was interrupted and the patient
underwent right mastectomy. A focally undifferentiated ductal carcinoma was
found,  estrogen  and  progesterone-receptors  positive.
2
years  later,  local
recurrence was diagnosed on the mastectomy scar.
Genetic analysis revealed the heterozygous c.9117GOA mutation of the BRCA2
gene. The same mutation was known in a kindred bearing the same family name
as our patient and living in the same region.
Conclusion
This is the first report of breast cancer occurring in a MtF transsexual patient with
a proven genetic abnormality. It raises awareness of the particular care required
by MtF patients due to their modified hormonal environment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP615
EP616
Clinical benefit of patients with advanced adrenocortical carcinoma
(Acc) treated in phase I clinical trials: the royal marsden hospital (Rmh)
experience
Ana Custodio, Juanita Lopez & Johann S de Bono
Drug Development Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust,
The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.
Introduction
After progression on conventional treatment options, some patients with advanced
ACC are offered experimental Phase I therapies. The outcomes of these patients
have not yet been formally evaluated. This study aims to describe the experience of
refractory ACC patients treated on Phase I clinical trials at the RMH.
Methods
We retrospectively reviewed the records of metastatic ACC patients consecu-
tively  treated  in  our  Drug  Development  Unit  between  January-2003
and
December-2014.
Results
Sixteen patients (43.8% males) with median age of 45 years (23-62) were treated
on 24 Phase I clinical encounters: 18 (75%) patients received targeted therapy
(55.5% insulin-like growth factor pathway inhibitors), 3 (12.5%) chemotherapy
and 3 (12.5%) chemotherapy combined with targeted agents. Overall response
rate was 8.4% and clinical benefit rates at 4 and 6 months were 37.5% and 8.4%,
respectively. Median progression-free survival and overall survival (OS) were
3.1 months (95% CI, 1.7-4.4) and 7.2 months (95% CI, 4.2-20.8), respectively.
ECOG PS 1 versus 0 (PZ0.009), O2 metastatic sites (P!0.001), peritoneal
metastases (PZ0.016), high platelet count (R410!109/l) (PZ0.014), albumin
!35 g/dl (PZ0.026) and elevated LDH (PZ0.019) were significantly associated
with shorter OS. Patients with RMH score 0-1 (good prognosis) had superior
median OS (14.1 months, 95% CI, 7.8-24.8) than those with a score 2-3 (bad
prognosis) (5 months; 95% CI, 3.5-6.6) (PZ0.001). Three (18.8%) patients
experienced drug-related grade 3-4 toxicities. There were no toxicity-related
treatment discontinuations or deaths.
Conclusions
Phase I clinical trials can be considered a reasonable therapeutic approach for
ACC patients who failed conventional treatments due to low risk of toxicity and
the potential for clinical benefit. The RMH prognostic score can help to identify
patients most likely to benefit from these investigational agents.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP616
EP617
Dual inhibition of PI3K and mTORC1/C2 by PKI-587 (PF-05212384)
as a promising therapeutic option for pulmonary neuroendocrine
tumor disease
Vanessa Broker1,2, Helma Freitag1, Friederike Christen1,5,
Franziska Briest1,4, Britta Siegmund1 & Patricia Grabowski1,4
1Charité, Berlin, Germany;2Universitat, Bonn, Germany;3Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universitat (FU), Berlin, Germany;
4Zentralklinik bad Berka, Bad Berka, Germany;5Institute of Biology,
Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, Germany.
Background
Pulmonary neuroendocrine  neoplasms are  heterogeneous  in their  clinical
behavior and therapeutic options are still not satisfactory. The ‘crosstalk’ of
different signaling pathways in NEN cells appears to be more complex as known
already.  PKI-587
is  a  highly  potent  novel  dual  inhibitor  of  PI3K  and
mTORC1/C2.
Aim
Therefore, we assessed the effects of PKI-587 in different pulmonary NEN cell
lines compared to the established mTORC1 inhibitor RAD001 and the non-
neuroendocrine lung cell line A549.
Materials and Methods
We  treated  the  cell  lines  NCI-H727,  NCI-H69
and  A549  with  increasing
concentrations of the inhibitor PKI-587, compared to RAD001 and DMSO. We
performed  MTS  cell  proliferation  assay  to  determine  efficacy  and  growth
inhibition. The induction of apoptosis was shown by caspase 3/7 activation and
cell cycle was analyzed by FACS. A JC-1 assay was additionally held out to show
occurrence of early apoptosis.
Results
In all cell lines PKI-587 inhibited dose-dependently proliferation with an IC50 of
approx. 30 - 6000 nM, whereas RAD001 was less effective. Treatment with PKI-
587 led to cell cycle arrest in all cell lines and induction of apoptosis in NCI-H727
and NCI-H69 cells, whereas no apoptosis was observed in non-neuroendocrine
A549 tumor cells.
Conclusion
PI3K/mTOR  dual  targeting is  a  promising new  therapeutic  approach in
neuroendocrine tumor disease. Protein analysis with Western Blot will be held
out in the next weeks and presented at the meeting. The efficacy of PKI-587
should be evaluated in further clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP617
EP618
The prevalence of pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms with
dedifferentiation during their natural history
Krystallenia Alexandraki, Maria Kaltsatou, Maria Chrysochoou,
Georgios Nikolopoulos, Panagiotis Moschouris, Anna Angelousi,
Vasiliki Mavroeidi, Marina Tsoli, Eleftherios Chatzellis, Georgios Boutzios
& Gregory Kaltsas
Department of Pathophysiology, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) are neoplasms with a slow progression and a
5-year survival 77-95%. It is well known that secondary deposits of NENs may
dedifferentiate during the natural history of the disease, presenting a more
aggressive biological behaviour.
Aim of the study
The prevalence of secondary foci dedifferentiation of pancreatic NENs (p-NENs).
Methods
From the NENs database of 414 patients, 160 (38.6%) had pNENs. Patients with
dedifferentiation were identified by a new biopsy of metastatic foci and a high
proliferation index Ki-67 MIBI (%) that indicated a poorly differentiated NENs
that originated from a primary site with a lower Ki-67.
Results
Five (3%) (mean age(GS.D.): 58.8G4.3 years, two males (40%)) patients, all with
sporadic NENs presented dedifferentiation during the natural history of their
disease as compared to 155 (52.9G15.8 years, 94 males (58.8%)) patients with
NENs  and  no  dedifferentiation  (120  with  sporadic  NEN).  At  presentation,
1 patient had a stage III NEN, while 4 had a Stage IV NEN; 1 patient had Ki-67
1%, while 4 had 5% (grade 1 and 2, respectively) while when dedifferentiation
was seen, 1 patient had Ki-67 30%, 2 had 50%, 1 had 60%, and 1 had 70%. At
presentation, all five patients had metastases: 3 only liver metastases, 1 liver along
with bone metastases and 1 liver along with ovaries and breast metastases; all 5
patients had a positive Octreoscan; 2 had a functional syndrome (one carcinoid
syndrome and one insulinoma). At presentation 2 patients were candidates for a
surgical approach. As first line treatment 2 patients received somatostatin analogs
(SSAs)  plus  everolimus,
1
SSAs  plus  everolimus  plus  peptide  receptor
radionuclide therapy (PRRT), and 1 SSA monotherapy, while another one was
followed-up  without  treatment.  Progression  free-survival
(PFS)  for
1st  line
treatment was 39.3G25.9 months, while PFS o further therapies varied from
13.4G11.2 months to 6.3G7.0 months (eight lines of treatment were registered).
At the last follow-up, 3 (60%) patients were alive with an overall survival
158.73G50.91 months.
Conclusions
The dedifferentiation of NENs implies a more aggressive biological behaviour
and worse overall survival despite the use of different therapies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP618
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP619
Referral of patients from Lithuania to determination of
dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate and no clinical consequences
of results
Julija Mazeikaite1, Mazvydas Uzkurnys1, Ilona Banisauskaite1,
Aiste Galkine2, Tomas Kurakovas1, Zilvinas Venclovas1,
Rasa Steponaviciute1, Vaidotas Urbanavicius2, Rasa Verkauskiene1 &
Valentinas Matulevicius1
1Institute of Endocrinology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences,
Kaunas, Lithuania;2Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine,
Endocrinology Center, Vilnius, Lithuania.
The 1772 patients were referred for the dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEA-
S) concentration assessment in Lithuania during 2014. We investigated 309
clinical history cases of which 162 presented with normal DHEA-S concentration
and 147 with elevated one.
One hundred twenty-three women with increased DHEA-S were examined.
The following symptoms were found: hirsutism K39%, menstruation disorders
K23%, weight gain K8%, and the rest K12 different items. One hundred forty-
two  women  with  normal  DHEA-S  complained  of:  menstruation  disorders
K32.3%, hirsutism K21.7%, infertility 10.6%, elevated blood pressure 8.1%
and the rest K20 different items.
From 44 men, 24 had increased DHEA-S levels. 33.3% of them complained of
elevated blood pressure and 29.2% had adrenal tumour. Of 20 men with normal
DHEA-S, 25% cases of adrenal tumour and 10% cases of elevated blood pressure
were found.
The body weight of women with elevated DHEA-S was higher as compared with
women with normal DHEA-S (meanGS.D.) 80.72G20.85 kg vs 72.54G22.41
(P!0.005) and analogically was the BMI. Concentration of DHEA-S in women
with normal DHEA-S was lower than the same parameter in women with high
DHEA-S: 5.7G3.05 micromol/l vs 12.49G3.81, (P!0.001). The DHEA-S ratio
(patient’s concentration of DHEA-S/highest level according to age) was 0.54G
0.23 vs 1.3G0.35 (P!0.001) respectively. Testosterone concentration in above
mentioned  two  female  groups  was
3.29G1.36 nmol/l  vs
4.27G1.83
(P!0.00001).
The percentage of analysed women with normal and high DHEA-S concentration
who underwent the diagnostic imaging was always the same. The abdominal
ultrasonography  was  used  for
26.1%  and
27.6%,  the  adrenal  computed
tomography was used for 14.8% and 17.1% and the magnetic resonance imaging
was applied for 2.1% and 2.4% of women with normal and increased DHEA-S
levels, respectively.
This suggests that finding of even high DHEA-S concentration does not increase
diagnostic imaging use and has no influence on the further clinical decisions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP619
EP620
Potential role of the adrenolitic drug mitotane in the treatment of
hepatocarcinoma (HCC): effect on cell proliferation in HCC cell lines
Claudia Pivonello1, Donatella Paola Provvisiero1, Mariarosaria Negri1,
Gilda Di Gennaro1, Cristina De Angelis2, Chiara Simeoli1,
Roberta Patalano1, Maria Cristina De Martino1, Annamaria Colao1 &
Rosario Pivonello1
1Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples
Federico Ii, Naples, Italy;2Ios & Coleman Medicina Futura Medical Center,
Centro Direzionale, Naples, Italy.
HCC is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. Local approaches are
generally preferred for patients whose disease is restricted to the liver. In patients
with extrahepatic disease systemic therapy can be considered. Chemotherapy did
not  demonstrate  convincing  survival  advantages  in  several  trails  for  HCC
patients. Presently, the kinase inhibitor sorafenib is the only approved systemic
target therapy for the treatment of advanced HCC. Mitotane (dichlorodiphenildi-
chloroethane or o,p’DDD), a chemotherapeutic agent, is the only drug approved
for the treatment of advanced adrenocortical cancer (ACC) but no data are
available concerning its cytotoxic role in different cancers, including HCC. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of mitotane on cell proliferation in
HCC cell lines. HepG2, HuH-7, JHH-6, PLC/PRF/5 HCC cell lines, and H295R,
ACC cell line, were used for the study. DNA assay was conduced to evaluate the
rate of inhibition after 6 days of treatment with mitotane in a concentration
ranging between 10K6 and 10K5 M, beneath the plasma mitotane levels achieved
by ACC patients. Western blot analysis for PARP cleavage was performed
to  evaluate  apoptosis.  Mitotane  was  able  to  inhibit  cell  proliferation  in  a
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
dose-dependent manner with a maximal effect of 54%, at 10K5 M (P!0.001)
and minimum effect of 35%, at 5*10K6 M (P!0.01) in PLC/PRF/5; maximal
effect of 49%, at 10K5 M (P!0.001) and minimum effect at 32%, at 7.5*10K6 M
(P!0.001) in JHH-6; maximal effect of 45.5%, at 10K5  M (P!0.001) and
minimum effect of 20%, at 5*10K6  M (P!0.001) in HuH7; maximal effect
of 36%, at 10K5  M (P!0.001) and minimum effect of 15.4%, at 5*10K6  M
(P!0.01) in HepG2. In H295R, that were used as control, maximal effect
was 82%, at 10K5 M (P!0.001) and minimum effect was 52%, at 5*10K6 M
(P!0.001). In each HCC cell line mitotane induced apoptosis as demonstrated by
PARP cleavage after 2 h of treatment. In conclusion, these preliminary data
demonstrated the in vitro antiproliferative role of mitotane in HCC cell lines
suggesting its potential use in the treatment of HCC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP620
EP621
Body image perception in acromegaly is not associated with objective
acromegalic changes, but depends on depressive symptoms
Christina Dimopoulou1, Sarah Leistner1, Marcus Ising2, Harald Schneider3,
Jochen Schopohl3, Sandra Rutz3, Robert Kosilek3, Richard Frohner3,
Guenter Stalla1 & Caroline Sievers1
1Department of Clinical Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute of
Psychiatry, Munich, Germany;2Department of Molecular Psychology, Max
Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany;3Medizinische Klinik und
Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
Objective
Diagnosis of acromegaly is often delayed up to 10 years after disease onset
despite  obvious  visual  changes,  bone  and  soft-tissue  deformities.  We
hypothesized that a reduced sense of body perception in acromegaly, possibly
mediated by psychiatric or cognitive alterations, might contribute to the delayed
initiation of a diagnostic work-up.
Design
Cross-sectional study.
Methods
We investigated perceived body image by standardized questionnaires (FKB-20:
Fragebogen zum Korperbild; FBeK: Fragebogen zur Beurteilung des eigenen
Korpers) in 81 acromegalic patients and contrasted them to a) a clinical control
group of 60 patients with non-functioning pituitary adenomas (NFPA) who lack
severe facial and physical alterations and b) normative values of healthy controls.
We further evaluated subjective body image perceptions in relation to objective
acromegalic changes as judged by medical experts and psychiatric pathology such
as depression and cognitive impairment.
Results
Acromegalic patients differed from NFPA patients in only one of the tested body
image scales (vital body dynamics, FKB-20), although NFPA patients hardly
exhibit any physical/bodily changes. Despite objective acromegalic changes as
judged by medical experts, body image scales were similar, indicating a lack of
subjective perception of the disease state. Depression was associated with worse
scores of body image perception, while no associations were found between body
image and cognitive decline, time of hormonal excess or treatment status.
Conclusions
Disturbed body image perception in acromegalic patients is unrelated to their
objective appearance and similar to those of NFPA patients without major bodily
changes. This fact might contribute to late disease diagnosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP621
EP622
The role of immunohistochemical assessment of somatostatin receptor
expression in case of patients with well differentiated neuroendocrine
neoplasms with symptoms of carcinoid syndrome and negative
somatostatin receptor imaging
Agnieszka Stefanska, Anna Sowa-Staszczak & Alicja Hubalewska-
Dydejczyk
Department of Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Krakow, Poland.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Over expression of somatostatin receptors (SSTR) is the characteristic feature of
well differentiated neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs). We present two patients
with well differentiated NENs of the large intestine with negative SRS and
without  SSTR  expression  confirmed  with  immunohistochemical
(IHCH)
examination and symptoms of carcinoid syndrome with good clinical response
to the therapy with long acting somatostatin analogs.
Case reports
53 years old man after right-sided hemicolectomy due to NETG2 (Ki67 5%) of
the ileo-cecal valve with mesenteral lymph nodes and liver metastases. Patient
presented with flushes. Therapy with long-acting somatostatin analog led to
release of symptoms. Laboratory findings prior to the therapy: 5OHIAA 545.7
umol/24 h (N: 10-40) and CgA 112 ng/ml (N: 0-6). While somatostatin receptor
scintigraphy (SRS) revealed increased pathological uptake only in the single
mesenteral lymph node IHCH examination was performed. IHCH examination
confirmed only low focal SSTR 1-5 expression.
Sixty four years old man with inoperable NETG1 (Ki67!2%) of the cecum with
lymph nodes and liver metastases. Patient also presented with severe flushes.
Therapy  with  long-acting  somatostatin analog  led  to release  of  symptoms.
Laboratory findings prior to the therapy: 5OHIAA 287 umol/24h and CgA 248
ng/ml. While SRS did not reveal any pathological uptake of the tracer in the
lesions visualized with CT IHCH examination was performed. IHCH did not
reveal any SSTR expression.
Conclusions
Presented case reports indicate the necessity of immunohistochemical assessment
of the expression of SSTR in case of patients with well differentiated NENs and
negative SRS results. Confirmed lack of SSTR expression make it necessary to
change  the  imaging  modalities  and  therapeutic  options  used  for  patients’
management. However we would like to emphasize the observed release of
symptoms of carcinoid syndrome in response to the therapy with long acting
somatostatin analogs in case of presented patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP622
EP623
Dual face of sex-steroid hormones, estrogen and progesterone, on
ovarian cancer metastasis via the regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition
Jae-Rim Heo, So-Ye Jeon & Kyung-Chul Choi
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
Ovarian carcinoma is the most deadly and leading cause of cancer death occurring
in the female reproductive tracts. 17b-estradiol (E2) has long been considered as
one of the effective causes of ovarian cancer through its actions via estrogen
receptors (ERs). In contrast, progesterone (P4) offers protective effect against
ovarian carcinogenesis. We predicted that P4 would inhibit the metastasis of BG-
1 human epithelial ovarian cancer cells, which was induced by E2. In the present
study, we confirmed that E2 increased BG-1 cell viability in a dose-dependent
manner, while the effect of E2 was inhibited by the co-treatment of P4. Also we
showed that P4 decreased the metastatic potential of BG-1 cells. P4 treatment
clearly led to functional changes in cancer cell migratory and invasive propensity.
We performed scratch assay and invasion assay to evaluate these functional
changes. The results showed that P4 inhibited the migration and invasion activity
of BG-1 ovarian cancer cells, which was increased by E2 via its receptor
interaction. These alterations were also related with changes in the epithelial-
mesenchymal  transition (EMT) markers such as E-cadherin, Vimentin, and
N-cadherin and EMT-associated transcriptional factors, Snail and Slug, too. Upon
P4 stimulation, the expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin was strikingly
increased, whereas the expression of mesenchymal makers like N-cadherin and
Vimentin was decreased. EMT-associated transcriptional factors, Snail and Slug,
were also significantly down-regulated. These results indicate that P4 can inhibit
the migration of BG-1 ovarian cancer cells by reducing EMT. Consequently, the
present results represent that P4 is a potent substance which may inhibit the
growth of human ovarian cancer cells and metastasis via regulation of PR.
Therefore, the hormone therapy using P4 may be a clinically effective tool for the
treatment of human epithelial ovarian cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP623
EP624
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling in the differential diagnosis of
ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome
Beatriz Lardiés Sánchez, Pablo Trincado Aznar, Leticia Pérez Fernández,
Isabel Azcona Monreal, María Martínez García, Guayente Verdes Sanz,
Alejandro Sanz París & Javier Acha Pérez
H.U. Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain.
Introduction
Bilateral sampling of the inferior petrosal sinuses is an accurate test to diagnose
Cushing’s disease and distinguish it with the ectopic ACTH syndrome. The aim of
the study was to review the petrosal sinus samplings carried out during last
10 years in our hospital.
Methods and material
The medical histories of patients admitted for suspected Cushing’s disease in the
last 10 years (from 2005 till 2015) were reviewed. There were selected the 18
cases of inferior petrosal sinuses samplings. The studied variables were: sex, age,
previous  Magnetic  Resonance  Image
(MRI),  results  of  the  petrosal  sinus
sampling, complications, subsequent therapeutic attitude and evolution of the
patient after the treatment.
Results
The mean age of the patients was 44.8 years and 83.3% were women. In 62% of
patients MRI was normal. In 61.1% left lateralization occurred, and in 22.2%
there was a bad catheterization of the sinus (most often the left). In 16 cases the
pituitary origin was confirmed, in 1 case that source was rejected and in another
case the origin is waiting for being determined. In the cases with pituitary origin,
neurosurgery was carried out, except in one case in which conservative treatment
was preferred. With regard to the complications, there were two cases of posterior
bleeding and one case of binocular diplopia due to a stroke. Petrosal sinus
sampling had to be repeated in one case of cyclical Cushing and in another case of
recurrence without clear image in the MRI. There were 2 cases of postoperative
recurrence and one case of not recovery after the surgery.
Conclusions
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling is a very useful technique in the diagnosis of
Cushing’s disease, with a low complication rate. The most frequent is the left
lateralization, and it is more frequent a bad catheterization of the left sinus.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP624
EP625
Four cases of hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome in young
patients with primary hyperparathyroidism in Russia
Elizaveta Mamedova, Natalya Mokrysheva, Ekaterina Pigarova,
Iya Voronkova, Evgeny Vasilyev, Vasily Petrov, Liudmila Rozhinskaya &
Anatoly Tiulpakov
Endocrinology Research Center, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Hyperparathyroidism-jaw  tumor
(HPT-JT)  syndrome  is  a  rare  autosomal-
dominant disorder caused by mutations in CDC73 tumor suppressor gene. To
date about 80 mutations in CDC73 have been described.
Case reports
Four patients  among  a cohort  of  young  patients
(!40  y.o.)  with  primary
hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) underwent next-generation sequencing (NGS) (Ion
TorrentTM PGMTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific-Life Technologies, USA) using a
custom-designed Ion AmpliSeqTM gene panel.
Case 1. A female with PHPT manifestation at age 20, osteitis fibrosa cystica
(OFC), kidney microlithiasis, serum Ca 4.09 mmol/l (2.15-2.55), parathyroid
hormone
(PTH)
2440
pg/ml
(15-65)  due  to  parathyroid  carcinoma,  and
endometrial polyp at diagnosis. At age 26 her PHPT recurred as lung metastases
of parathyroid carcinoma, requiring surgical intervention. Case 2. A female with
PHPT manifestation at age 24, severe OFC, kidney microlithiasis, serum Ca 3.36
mmol/l, Ca2C1.56 mmol/l (1.03-1.29), PTH 558.8 pg/ml due to parathyroid
carcinoma. A patient had positive family history, with polycystic kidney disease
in her mother. Case 3. A male with PHPT manifestation at age 22, severe OFC,
serum Ca 3.9 mmol/l, Ca2C1.84 mmol/l, PTH 1441 pg/ml due to parathyroid
carcinoma. Case 4. A female with mild PHPT manifestation at age 30, serum Ca
2.94 mmol/l, Ca2C1.24 mmol/l, PTH 125.1 pg/ml due to single parathyroid
hyperplasia.
NGS revealed four heterozygous germline CDC73 mutations, respectively: a
novel nonsense mutation in exon 3 p.R91X, a nonsense mutation in exon 6
p.Q166X, a novel nonsense mutation in exon 7 p.R229X and a novel missense
mutation in exon 8 p.R263C.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
We describe four cases of HPT-JT in young patients with PHPT in Russia. 3 of 4
mutations are described for the first time. Occurrence of nonsense CDC73
mutations in patients with parathyroid carcinoma and a missense mutation in a
patient with parathyroid hyperplasia may reflect various degrees of parafibromin
dysfunction.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP625
EP626
Efficiency of cabergoline suppressive therapy in young patients with
prolactinoma
Oksana Khyzhnyak, Iurii Karachentsev, Myroslava Mykytyuk &
Teona Gogitidze
GU ‘V. Danilevsky’ Institute of Endocrine Pathology Problems National
Academy of Medical Scientis of Ukraine’, Khariv, Ukraine.
Aim
The aim is to study the clinical and hormonal peculiarities of PROL (prolactinoma),
manifesting in people under the age of 18 and monitoring the effectiveness of
suppressive CAB (Cabergoline, Dostinex) therapy during 12 months period.
Materials and methods
The total study included 11 patients with PROL, manifesting in childhood. There
were also examined 54 healthy volunteers (25 males and 29 females) aged 15-19 to
determine the range of normal PRL blood values. It were assessed TSA (total
secretory activity, ng/ml), PaSA (partial secretory activity, ng/ml/cm3) and SpTG
(the speed of tumor growth, cm3/yrs).
Results and their discussion
At initial examination PRL blood levels was (MeZ89.6 ng/ml): macroPROL
(MeZ52.3 ng/ml); microPROL (MeZ200.0 ng/ml). Before treatment PaSA in the
whole  group  was
(MeZ81.3 ng/ml/cm3);  in  group  with  macro-  and  giant
PROL(MeZ47.1 ng/ml/cm3); with microPROL (MeZ98.9 ng/ml/cm3) (P!0.05).
SpTG was (MeZ0.8 cm3/yrs). Univariate regression analysis showed that the
average therapeutic CAB dose was (MeZ1.0 mg/week); the average cumulative
dose-(MeZ44.2 mg/yrs). A statistically significant reduction of PRL levels after
1 month of therapy was found, but the most positive effect was achieved after
3 months therapy (nZ9). The high efficiency of high start doses of CAB were
confirmed by MRI: after 12 months of therapy the decreasing of the pituitary volume
by 50% or more was marked in 5 patients, in 2 patients - by 30-49%, and 2 girls
became pregnant.
Conclusion
Prescription of high start doses of CAB is safe and effective in treatment of PROL
in children, as evidenced by the absence of side effects, the normalization of the
pituitary-gonadal axis and growth hormone function, rapid sustained reduction in
the concentration of PRL level to 5 percentile norm age in most patients (90.1%),
statistically significant reduction of PaSA in all patients, decrease of pituitary
tumors by 50% or more in 54.5% patients.
Keywords: prolactinoma, prolactin, children, adolescents, cabergoline (Dostinex)
therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP626
EP627
RSUME regulates tumorigenesis and metastasis in pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors
Yonghe Wu1,2, Lucas Tedesco3, Kristin Lucia1, Anna M Schlitter4,
Irene Esposito5, Christoph J Auernhammer6, Marily Theodoropoulou1,
Eduardo Arzt3,7, Gunter K Stalla1 & Ulrich Renner1
1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Clinical Neuroendocrinology, Munich,
Germany;2German Cancer Research Center, Molecular Genetics, Heidel-
berg, Germany;3Instituto de Investigación en Biomedicina de Buenos Aires
(IBioBA) - CONICET - Partner Institute of the Max Planck Society, Buenos
Aires, Argentina;4Technical University of Munich, Institute of Pathology,
Munich, Germany;5University of Dusseldorf, Institute of Pathology,
Dusseldorf, Germany;6Department of Internal Medicine II, Interdisciplin-
ary Center of Neuroendocrine Tumours of the GastroEnteroPancreatic
System, University of Munich, Munich, Germany;7Departamento de
Fisiología y Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y
Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
The factors triggering pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (PanNET) progression
are largely unknown. Here we investigated the role and mechanisms of the
sumoylation enhancing protein RSUME in PanNET tumorigenesis. Immunohis-
tochemical studies showed that RSUME is strongly expressed in normal human
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
pancreas, in particular in b-cells. RSUME expression is reduced in insulinomas
and is nearly absent in other types of PanNETs suggesting a role in PanNET
tumorigenesis.  In  human  pancreatic  neuroendocrine  BON1
cells,  RSUME
stimulates hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and vascular endothelial growth
factor-A (VEGF-A), which are key components of tumor neovascularisation. In
contrast,  RSUME  suppresses  nuclear  factor-kB
(NF-kB)  and  its  target
interleukin-8 (IL-8). Correspondingly, PanNET cells with RSUME knockdown
showed decreased HIF-1a activity and increased NF-kB and IL-8 production
leading to a moderate reduction of VEGF-A release as reduced HIF-1a/VEGF-A
production is partly compensated by NF-kB/IL-8-induced VEGF-A. Notably,
RSUME stabilizes the tumor suppressor PTEN, which is frequently lost in
PanNETs and whose absence is associated with metastasis formation. In vivo
orthotopic transplantation of PanNET cells with or without RSUME expression
into nude mice showed that PanNETs without RSUME present reduced PTEN
expression, grow faster and form multiple liver metastases. In sum, RSUME
differentially regulates key components of PanNET formation suggesting that the
observed loss of RSUME in advanced PanNETs is critically involved in PanNET
tumorigenesis, particularly in metastasis formation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP627
EP628
Potential role of vitamin D in restoring sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC): 1,25(OH)vitamin D (VITD) reverts
everolimus (EVE) resistance in a HCC cell line
Claudia Pivonello1, Donatella Paola Provvisiero1, Mariarosaria Negri1,
Gilda Di Gennaro1, Cristina De Angelis2, Giacomo Galdiero1,
Chiara Simeoli1, Maria Cristina De Martino1, Annamaria Colao1 &
Rosario Pivonello1
1Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples
Federico II, Naples, Italy;2IOS & Coleman Medicina Futura Medical
Center, Centro Direzionale, Naples, Italy.
HCC is a difficult-to-treat- cancer with poor prognosis. The recent EVOLVE-1
trial demonstrated that EVE did not improve overall survival in molecularly and
clinically unselected patients with advanced HCC resistant to sorafenib treatment.
In selected patients, the well-established antitumor effect of EVE could make this
drug a potential adjuvant therapy. Unfortunately, the acquired resistance to this
molecule due to the tumor adaptation to chronic drug use is a current challenge.
VitD has been deemed as potential regimen to treat a variety of cancers alone or
in combination with other drugs. The aim of this study was to assess the
antiproliferative effect of the combined treatment with EVE and VitD in JHH-6, a
model of HCC cell line, and to explore the role of VitD pre-treatment in the
re-sensitization to EVE in JHH-6 cell line resistant to EVE (JHH-6 RR). JHH-6
RR were obtained after 4 months of treatment with EVE 10K8 M. Messenger and
protein  VitD  receptor
(VDR)  expression  was  confirmed  by  RT-qPCR  and
immunofluorescence. DNA assay was established to evaluate the proliferation
rate in basal and resistant cells after EVE treatment (from 10K14 M to 10K8 M)
alone  or  in  combination  with  VitD
(10K7
M).  In  basal  condition,  EVE
significantly reduced the proliferation index in a dose-dependent manner after
6 days of treatment and VitD did not improve EVE effect. JHH-6 RR cells no
longer responded to EVE treatment but 12 h of VitD pre-treatment was sufficient
to significantly restore the efficacy of EVE at concentration ranging from 10K14
M to 10K8 M with a minimum effect of 14% of inhibition at 10K14 M (P!0.01)
and a maximum effect of 35.3% at 10K8 M (P!0.001). These preliminary data
suggested the use of VitD to overcome the acquired resistance to EVE in HCC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP628
EP629
Circulating levels of survivin in acromegaly
Esra Ademoglu1, Zehra Candan2, Suheyla Gorar2, Mutlu Niyazoglu3,
Ayse Carlioglu4, Faruk Yildiz5, Idris Baydar5, Hakan Sevimli5 &
Abdulmuttalib Arslan5
1Abant Izzet Baysal University, School of Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bolu, Turkey;2Ankara Training and
Research Hospital, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara,
Turkey;3Cerrahpasa Medical School, Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Istanbul University, Erzurum, Turkey;4Erzurum Training and
Research Hospital, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Erzurum,
Turkey;5Erzurum Training and Research Hospital, Division of Internal
Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Acromegaly is a chronic disorder characterized by chronic growth hormone (GH)
excess. In most of cases, GH hypersecretion is derived from somatotroph cell
tumors. Survivin is a member of apoptosis protein family, which was recently
showed to be expressed in different benign and malignant human tumors. A
number of studies showed overexpression of survivin in pituitary adenomas. This
study is intended to determine circulating levels of survivin in patients with
acromegaly.
Methods
The study group was composed of 19 newly diagnosed patients with acromegaly.
Concurrently, 19 healthy individuals were included in the study as control group.
Serum survivin levels, GH, insulin like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and, some other
biochemical parameters as fasting glucose, creatinine, alanine aminotransferase,
cholesterol, triglyceride, highdensity lipoprotein cholesterol, lowdensity lipopro-
tein  cholesterol  were  measured  in  each  subject.  Correlation  analysis  was
performed between survivin and GH, IGF-1.
Results
Serum survivin levels tended to be higher in acromegaly group, but this was not
reach statistical significance (PO0.05). Serum survivin levels were comparable
among acromegaly patients and controls. Neither GH nor IGF-1 correlated with
serum survivin.
Conclusion
Larger scale studies are needed concerning the circulating levels of survivin in
patients with acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP629
EP630
A thymic carcinoid tumor causing Cushing syndrome in the setting
of a multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 1
Ana Gligic1, Mirjana Sumarac-Dumanovic1,2, Aleksandra Kendereski1,2,
Danica Stamenkovic-Pejkovic1, Goran Cvijovic1,2, Svetlana Zoric1,
Danka Jeremic1 & Dragan Micic1,2
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic diseases, Clinical Center
of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;2Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
Multiple  endocrine  neoplasia  syndrome  type
1
(MEN1)  associated  thymic
carcinoids (Th-NETs) are rare and have poor prognosis. Cushing syndrome (CS)
caused by Th-NET in MEN1 syndrome is extremely rare.
Case report
We report a case of a 55-year-old man with CS at presentation due to ectopic
ACTH production in MEN1 syndrome. Thirty years ago, this patient had total
gastric resection due to Zollinger-Ellison’s syndrome and extirpation of two
tumors of pancreas, when diagnosed with gastrinoma. Three years prior to the
manifestation of CS, the patient was diagnosed with primary hyperparathyroidism
(PHPT) and thus treated with parathyroidectomy, near-total cervical thymectomy
and total thyroidectomy. Histological analysis revealed hyperplasia of para-
thyroid glands, papillary thyroid carcinoma and regular thymic morphology.
Based on gastrinoma and PHPT, the patient was diagnosed with MEN1 syndrome
and the germline mutation of MEN1 gene was detected. This time, the patient
presented with weakness, weight loss and hypokalemia. MDCT of the thorax
revealed the large mediastinal mass. Subsequently, the percutaneous biopsy of the
tumor was done and the histopathological analysis revealed neuroendocrine
carcinoma.  The  tumor  was  operated  and  the  diagnosis  of  atypical  thymic
carcinoid with high proliferative activity index Ki 67 was confirmed. Eight
months after the operation control MDCT revealed recurrent mediastinal tumor
that was reoperated. Three months after the reoperation the patient developed
mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Conclusion
The presented case of MEN1 is peculiar because the majority of Th-NETs in
MEN1  are  nonfunctional  and  ectopic  secretion  of  ACTH  seldom  occurs.
Although Th-NET  did not show immunohistochemical staining  for ACTH,
level of ACTH in the blood significantly decreased after the operation. Therefore,
it is not impossible that the carcinoid tumor may secrete ACTH precursors and/or
CRH instead of ACTH. The present case highlights the importance of screening
MEN1 patients for thymic carcinoid and reinforce the notion that subtotal
transcervical thymectomy was not effective profilactic tool in this case.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP630
EP631
Clinical characteristics, survival and prognostic factors of patients with
adrenocortical carcinoma: a tertiary centre experience
Valentina Elezovic, Djuro Macut, Sanja Ognjanovic, Tatjana Isailovic,
Bojana Popovic, Ivana Bozic Antic, Tamara Bogavac, Dusan Ilic &
Svetozar Damjanovic
Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Disease, Clinical Center
of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
Adrenocortical  carcinoma
(ACC)  is  rare  malignancy  associated  with  poor
prognosis. The aim of this study was to present clinical characteristics and
survival of patients with ACC and to analyse the effect of prognostic factors on
survival.
We retrospectively analysed
69
patients
(46
female  and
23
males)  with
pathologically confirmed ACC who were treated in our hospital between January
2005 and December 2015. The median age at diagnosis was 51,0 years (range
14-74), mean tumour size was 11.3 cm (range 3.1-30 cm) and median follow up
duration was 36 month (range 3-240). Patients with hormone secreting ACC
(43.5%) mainly presented with isolated Cushing’s (21.7%), or combined with
hyperandrogenism (20.3%); 56.5% of patients had non-functioning tumour. The
group included 50% low-stage tumours (4 stage I, 29 stage II) and 50% high-stage
tumours (no stage III, 33 stage IV). Metastatic disease was present in 33% of
patient at the time of diagnosis and 39% had acquired metastasis. Surgical
resection was performed in 89.9% of patients; 78.9% of patients were treated with
mitotane, and 24% with chemotherapy. Median overall survival (OS) was 71
months (95%CI 41-100) with 5 year OS 51% (75.1% in stage II, 26% in stage IV).
The 5-year OS for hormone secreting and nonsecreting tumours were 33% and
62%. Median disease free survival was estimated 6 months (95%CI 0-12). The
results of univariante Cox regression analysis showed that gender, age and tumour
secretory activity were significant variables with patient survival and surgical
resection, disease stage and presence of metastatic disease at the diagnosis were
highly significant. The results of multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that
the surgical treatment (HR-7.16, 95%CIZ1.48-34.55, PZ0.014), age (HR-0.409,
95%CIZ0.177-0.947, PZ0.037), and presence of metastatic disease at the time
of  diagnosis
(HR-0.217,
95%CIZ0.101-0.729,  PZ0.010)  were  independent
prognostic factors for survival.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP631
EP632
Evaluation of the incidence and clinical characteristics of glucose
metabolism alterations during the follow-up of surgically treated
insulinomas
Joa˜o Sérgio Neves1, Eva Lau1,2, Joana Oliveira1,2, Ana Isabel Oliveira1,2,
Paula Freitas1,2 & Davide Carvalho1,2
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Sa˜o João
Hospital Center, Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal;2Instituto de Investigac¸ão e Inovação em Saúde, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
The  incidence  of  glucose  metabolism  alterations  during  the  follow-up  of
surgically treated insulinomas is largely unknown. Our aim was to evaluate the
incidence, and the clinical characteristics, of diabetes and prediabetes in this
population.
Methods
We retrospectively analyzed the cases diagnosed as insulinomas in a Central
Hospital in Portugal in the period between January 1980 and December 2015.
Results
We identified 19 patients, 68% women, with a median age at onset of symptoms
of 49 years. Enucleation of the tumor was performed in 4 cases and the remaining
15 were submitted to partial pancreatectomy. In one patient, the surgery did not
remove the tumor and so total pancreatectomy was performed. All tumors were
solitary, with a median diameter of 1.8 cm. Ten tumors were located at the head of
the pancreas, 4 at the body, 4 at the tail and 1 at the uncinate process. The median
of follow-up was 48 months, with only 4 patients with a follow-up inferior to 6
months because of loss of follow-up or recent intervention. A total of 9 patients
presented glucose metabolism alterations on follow-up. Four patients presented
diabetes in the immediate postoperative period, 1 presented diabetes 4 months
after surgery, 3 presented diabetes 10-12 years after surgery and 1 patient present
prediabetes 54 months after surgery. The mean age at diagnosis of glucose
metabolism alterations was 54 years. Regarding treatment, 3 patients were treated
with  insulin,
3 were  with  oral  antidiabetic  drugs,
1 with  insulin  and  oral
antidiabetic drugs and 2 with lifestyle interventions. Concerning microvascular
and macrovascular complications, only 1 patient presented microalbuminuria.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Glucose metabolism alterations are a frequent complication during the follow-up
of insulinomas. Prevention, early diagnosis and treatment of diabetes in patients
with surgically treated insulinomas must be a priority during the follow-up of
these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP632
EP633
Mechano growth factor (MGF) expression increased in secondary
compared to primary foci in well neuroendocrine neoplasms
Krystallenia Alexandraki1, Anastasios Philippou2, Georgios Boutzios1,
Panagiotis Moschouris1, James Karnezis1, Irini Theohari3,
Michael Koutsilieris2, Ioanna Delladetsima3 & Gregory Kaltsas1
1Department of Pathophysiology, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Athens, Greece;2Department of Experimental Physiology, Medical
School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece;
3First Department of Pathology, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) has a role in cell proliferation, differentiation,
migration, and survival. By alternative splicing different IGF-I mRNA transcripts
as IGF-IEc (mechano growth factor, MGF) or IGF-IEa variants are produced.
MGF induces muscle hypertrophy and implicated in the pathophysiology of
various types of cancer. Aim of the study was to investigate the role of MGF in the
pathophysiology of neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs).
Methods
We have used immunohistochemistry in 39 specimens of patients with NENs to
show the expression status of MGF. Proliferation index ki-67 MIBI (%) was also
evaluated. Specimens were divided in three subgroups: in 15 samples Ki-67 was
%2%, in 15 2-20%, and in 9 O20%.
Results
Specimens from 8 gastric, 11 pancreatic, 2 appendiceals, 7 small intestine, 1 colic
and 1 retrosigmoidal, 1 gallblader and 3 lung NENs, 2 undifferentiated unknown
primary (UPO), 3 UPO were  studied. No MGF staining was found in 19
specimens while cytoplasmatic staining was found in 20 specimens: focal staining
was seen in 13 (65%) and diffuse in 6 (30%) and dot like in 1 (5%). Ki-67 and
MGF expression were positively correlated in all the samples studied reaching a
trend difference (rZ0.29, PZ0.07); the same correlation was seen only in the
subgroup with %2% (rZ0.48, PZ0.07) but not in the other subgroups studied.
MGF staining did not differ between primary and secondary foci in total sample
population but staining was increased in secondary compared to primary foci in
samples with ki-67 2-20%.
Conclusions
Our preliminary data indicate that MGF expression may have a limited role in the
pathophysiology of NENs. Further studies will shed light to the exact role of MGF
in NENs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP633
EP634
Hypoglycaemia unawareness - a challenge in the management of a Von
Hippel-Lindau patient
Rita Bettencourt-Silva1,2, Pedro Souteiro1,3, Daniela Magalhães1,2,
Joana Oliveira1,2, Renato Bessa de Melo4, José Costa Maia4,
Davide Carvalho1,2 & Joana Queirós1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro Hospi-
talar São João, EPE, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Instituto de Investiga
¸ão e Inovaça˜o em Saúde,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;4Department of General Surgery,
Centro Hospitalar São Joa˜o, EPE, Porto, Portugal.
Background
The key physiologic defences against hypoglycaemia are the decrease in insulin
and the increased secretion of glucose counterregulatory hormones, namely
glucagon  and  epinephrine.  The  absence  of  warning  signs  of  impending
neuroglycopenia is known as hypoglycaemic unawareness.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Case report
Male, 26 year-old, without relevant medical history and with normal body mass
index, presented with hypertension, palpitations and diaphoresis. Clinical
suspicion of pheochromocytoma was confirmed by abdominal CT scan and
24-hour  urinary  catecholamine  levels:  normetanephrine
8304 mg/24 h
(ref.88-444),  norepinephrine
2511 mg/24 h  (ref.15-80)  and  vanillylmandelic
acid 33.5 mg/24 h (ref.1.4-6.5). He was diagnosed with bilateral pheochromocy-
toma and underwent bilateral adrenalectomy without perioperative complications
(both benign tumours in anatomopathological study). Treatment with hydrocorti-
sone and fludrocortisone was then initiated. Genetic testing revealed a missense
mutation (arg167gln) at exon 3 of VHL gene compatible with Von Hippel-Lindau
disease. His family history revealed pheochromocytoma in 3 members (mother,
uncle and cousin), but genetic testing was not previously performed in any of them.
Six years later the patient developed a pancreatic endocrine tumour of uncertain
behaviour and was submitted to proximal pancreatectomy. De novo pancreatic
lesions appeared 4 years later, leading to a total pancreatoduodenectomy. Post-
operatively the clinical management of secondary diabetes was very difficult. He
was treated with multiple daily insulin injection regimen (detemir twice daily plus
prandial lispro).  Given the  absence  of  adrenal  cortisol  and  catecholamines
secretion,  and  of  glucagon  secretion  by  the  pancreas,  his  hypoglycemic
counterregulatory responses were impaired, leading to severe and recurrent
hypoglycaemia unawareness. These episodes frequently had severe neuroglyco-
penic symptoms,  seizures  and  loss of  consciousness  requiring  glucagon or
parenteral glucose therapy. Currently he is learning carbohydrate counting with
symptoms improvement and use of an insulin pump was proposed.
Conclusion
This  case  report  highlights  the  difficult  and  challenging  management  of
hypoglycaemia  unawareness  in  a  patient  with  Von  Hippel-Lindau  disease
previously submitted to bilateral adrenalectomy and total pancreatectomy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP634
EP635
Thyrotoxicosis leading to adrenal crises reveals primary bilateral
adrenal lymphoma - case report
Catarina Roque, Ricardo Fonseca, Carlos Bello, Ricardo Capit
˜o,
Francisco Sousa Santos & Carlos Vasconcelos
Hospital de Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction
Amiodarone use may be associated with secondary severe organ dysfunction.
Thyrotoxicosis develops in 15% cases. Primary bilateral adrenal lymphoma is a
rare malignancy. If frequently presents bilaterally and with symptoms of adrenal
insufficiency. Symptomatology for both conditions is nonspecific, especially in
the elderly, and a high suspicion index is necessary for appropriate diagnosis.
Case report
A 78 year old female presented to the emergency department due to confusion,
nausea and vomiting. She had history of Diabetes Mellitus, Hypertension and
atrial fibrillation. She had been recently treated for urinary infection associated
with vomiting and acute hypochloremic hyponatemia. Leucocyturia persisted and
due to TSH 0.01 uU/ml, fT4 68 (10-18) pmol/l, fT3 6.34 (4-8) pmol/l, the patient
was  admitted  to  the  Endocrinology  ward.  Further  evaluation  supported
amiodarone-induced  type 2 thyroiditis. Despite appropriate therapy, thyroid
function  further  aggravated.  She  synchronously  developed  a  septic  state
associated with nosocomial pneumonia. Hemodynamic instability, hyponatremia,
hypoglycemia and vomiting raised the suspicion of concomitant adrenocortical
insufficiency. Fluid resuscitation and hydrocortisone led to clinical improvement,
with high dose glucocorticoid requirements. Adrenal insufficiency was admitted.
Abdominal echography showed right and left justa-renal heterogeneous solid
nodules (6.6 and 7 cm respectively) and left pleural effusion. Fluid analyses was
negative  for  malignant  cells.  Thoracoabdominal  contrasted-tomography
suggested an endobronchic primary, also suspected during bronchofibroscopy,
with hepatic and adrenal secondary deposits. The left mass compressed the ureter
and  seemed  to  penetrate  the  kidney  and  vascular  structures.
24 h-Urinary
metanephirnes were normal but the adrenals were not accessible to biopsy. After a
period of seemingly favourable evolution the patient died. Autopsy confirmed
primary adrenal non-hodgkin lymphoma.
Conclusion
Primary adrenal lymphoma is a rare cause of adrenal insufficiency but progression
is often fast and fatal. This entity must integrate the differential diagnosis,
especially in the elderly patient.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP635
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP636
Hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumour syndrome in Adolescence
Saba Hafeez, John Kalk, Aaisha Saqib & Louise Izzat
Medway Maritime hospital, Kent, UK.
Introduction
The hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumour syndrome is a rare autosomal, dominantly
inherited disorder characterized by neoplastic or cystic lesions in parathyroid
gland, jaws and the kidneys. With approximately 200 reported cases in literature
this condition remains a challenge both diagnostically and in guiding further
management.
Case report
Seventeen year old scholar was seen by the maxillofacial department at Medway
Hospital with 2 painless swellings in his mouth, present for 2-3 months. Dental
X-ray (OPG) showed resorption of bone at the sites of the swellings. Routine
blood tests showed serum corrected calcium of 4.12 mmol/l (16.48 mg/dl),
plasma PTH of 628 ng/l (10-65) and normal renal and thyroid functions. He had
experienced significant polyuria and polydipsia for at least 2-3 years prior to this
presentation. A CT scan of neck showed 2.5 cm ! 2 cm right lower lobe
parathyroid adenoma; ultrasound scan of his kidneys was normal. The tumour was
resected: histology confirmed a benign parathyroid adenoma. There was no
family history of any tumours.
Post-operatively  the  patient  developed  severe  and  prolonged
‘hungry  bone
syndrome’. He required prolonged HDU admission for intravenous calcium
infusions despite high dose Alfacalcidol
(4 mcg/day) and then oral calcium
supplement at home. These are being reduced stepwise, at present as plasma PTH
remains suppressed.
Soon after the parathyroidectomy the maxillary swellings were biopsied. The
histology  showed  spindle  cells,  osteoclast  giant  cells  and  substantial  bone
formation.
Genetic tests showed the characteristic mutation in the CDC73 gene, confirming
the diagnosis of the ‘hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumour syndrome’.
Discussion
On review of literature, in HPT-JT syndrome, jaw tumours are mostly composed
of fibro cellular tissue without giant cells. In contrast our patient had multiple
giant cell granulomas. In most cases, an affected person has one parent with the
condition. This case illustrates consideration of genetic testing in younger patients
presenting with primary hyperparathyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP636
EP637
Analogues of somatostatin in preoperative treatment of rare NET
Lucyna Papierska1, Karolina Nowak1, Michał Rabijewski2 &
´
Jarosław 
wikła3
1Medical Center of Postgraduate Education, Department of Endocrinology,
Warsaw, Poland;2Medical University of Warsaw, Department of Internal
Diseases, Diabetology and Endocrinology, Warsaw, Poland;3University of
Warmia and Mazury, The Faculty of Medical Sciences, Department of
Radiology, Olsztyn, Poland.
Analogues of somatostatin are widely used in management of neuroendocrine
tumors. The “classic” indications for this treatment are: acromegaly and NETs of
midgut to diminish symptoms caused by hormonal overproduction and slow down
the tumors’ growth. However we consider the use of this medication also in the
other cases in which we confirm the presence of somatostatin receptors in tumor
by somatostatin receptor scintigraphy.
We would like to present three cases of symptomatic, resistant to pharmacological
therapy, neuroendocrine tumors, in which only preoperative treatment with long-
acting Octreotide enabled successful surgery.
Case 1. 40-years-old man with profound hypoposphataemia caused by GF-23
secreting  tumor  in  the  right  maxillary  sinus
(glomangiopericytoma).  The
treatment with phosphorus and active vitamin D metabolites was ineffective.
The improvement of phosphorus concentration was necessary for safety of
anesthesia and proper function of respiratory muscles after the extubation, so
waiting  for  surgery  patient  was  treated  with  long  acting  Octreotide,  and
phosphorus level increased to proper values.
Case 2. 44-years-old woman with paroxysmal tachycardia and hypertension up to
200/140 caused by catecholamine secreting tumor localized in mediastinum
(paragandglioma). The preoperative treatment with alpha, beta and calcium
channel blockers and also ACI and diuretics was ineffective. On the second day
after the Octreotide injection the blood pressure fell down and directly before
surgery only the alpha and beta blockers were used.
Case 3. 50-years-old woman with paroxysmal sweating and hypertension up to
240/140 caused by pheochromocytoma of the left adrenal gland. The treatment as
in the case above - also ineffective; she was twice disqualified from the operation
due to blood pressureO200/120. After the Octreotide injection the blood pressure
fell  down,  however  the  reduction  of  the  medications  before  surgery  was
impossible.
These  cases  exemplify  possibility  of  unconventional use  of  long  acting
somatostatin analogues in preoperative treatment of rare neuroendocrine tumors.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP637
EP638
A case of tumor-induced osteomalacia in which recurrence and bilateral
lung metastases occurred following tumor resection
Toshiaki Tanaka1, Eiji Itagaki1, Rie Moriya1, Minori Ishitobi1,
Mai Ishimoto1, Ken Kondo1, Yoshikazu Sumitani1, Susumu Nishida1,
Takuma Kondo1, Toshio Hosaka1, Kenji Morii2, Jun Ishii3, Hiroshi Kanma3
& Hitoshi Ishida1
1Third Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Diabetes,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kyorin University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan;2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine,
Kyorin University, Tokyo, Japan;3Department of Pathology, Kyorin
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
A 32-year-old woman with a nine-year history of right hip pain was admitted after
she became unable to walk. Based on marked hypophosphatemia as indicated by
serum phosphate of 1.4 mg/dl, intactPTH;29 pg/ml, TmP/GFR;1.14 mg/dl, and
fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) increased to 713 pg/ml, tumor-induced
osteomalacia
(TIO)  was  diagnosed.  Systemic  venous  sampling  of  FGF23
performed for locating the tumor revealed an elevated level of 1600 pg/ml in
the right femoral vein, and MRI of the right leg showed a tumor 26mm in size on
the dorsal side of the right knee. In June 2011, the tumor in the right knee was
surgically resected. Hypophosphatemia promptly improved following surgery,
and  FGF23
also  returned  to  normal.  The  patient  became  able  to  walk
independently and was able to reintegrate into society. The pathological diagnosis
was  phosphaturic  mesenchymal  tumor.  However,  serum  phosphate  again
decreased in April 2013 to 2.6 mg/dl. FGF23 also increased to 221 pg/ml. Leg
MRI was performed, and a tumor 25 mm in size was again detected on the dorsal
side  of  the right knee.  FDG PET/CT revealed  significant  uptake  that was
consistent with the tumor on the dorsal side of the right knee, as well as multiple
nodules seen in both lung fields on CT. The tumor in the right knee was surgically
resected in September 2013. However, FGF23, which was elevated to 1500 pg/ml
preoperatively, remained high postoperatively at 950 pg/ml. Hypophosphatemia
also did not improve, and phosphate treatment is being continued. Because she
tested positive for somatostatin receptor 2 on RT-PCR using a resected sample,
treatment using a somatostatin analog is being considered.
Summary: Malignant TIO is extremely rare, and no effective treatment exists for
this condition. We herein report our experience with a case of malignant TIO in
which recurrence and metastases to both lungs were observed two years after
tumor resection.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP638
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP639
Effects of genetically engineered human neural stem cells expressing
cytosine deaminase and interferon-beta on the growth of lymph node
metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma
Geon-Tae Park & Kyung-Chul Choi
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
Genetically engineered stem cells may be advantageous for gene therapy against
various human cancers due to their inherent tumor-tropic properties. In this study,
we employed human neural stem cells (HB1.F3; hNSCs) transduced with genes
expressing  Escherichia  coli  cytosine  deaminase
(HB1.F3.CD)  and  human
interferon-beta (HB1.F3.CD.IFN-b) as a treatment strategy for human lymph
node metastatic colorectal cancer. CD can convert the prodrug 5-fluorocytosine
(5-FC) to its active chemotherapeutic form, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), which induces
a tumor-killing effect through DNA synthesis inhibition. IFN-b also slightly
inhibits tumor growth by inducing apoptotic process. In RT-PCR analysis, we
confirmed that HB1.F3.CD cells expressed CD gene and HB1.F3.CD.IFN-b cells
expressed both CD and IFN-b genes. A modified transwell migration assay
showed that HB1.F3.CD and HB1.F3.CD.IFN-b cells selectively migrated toward
SW-620 human lymph node metastatic colorectal cancer cells. When co-cultured
with HB1.F3.CD or HB1.F3.CD.IFN-b cells in the presence of 5-FC, the viability
of SW-620 cells were significantly reduced. In a xenografted mouse model,
hNSCs treatment significantly inhibited the growth of tumor mass and the
expression of proliferative marker without any harmful effects on the animals. In
addition, fluorescent-labeled hNSCs could be found in the excised tumor mass.
The  tumor-tropic  properties  of  these  engineered  hNSCs  were  found  to  be
attributed to chemoattractant factors secreted by SW-620 cells, SDF-1, c-kit,
uPAR,  uPA  and  CCR2.  Consequently,  the  present  results  represent  that
engineered hNSCs and prodrug treatment inhibits the growth of human lymph
node metastatic colorectal cancer. Therefore, hNSC therapy may be a clinically
effective tool for the treatment of human lymph node metastatic colorectal cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP639
EP640
gp91-phox in differential diagnosis of hyperplastic lesions in
parathyroid gland
Oliwia Segiet1, Mariusz Deska2, Łukasz Mielan´ czyk1, Marlena Brzozowa-
Zasada1, Grzegorz Buła2, Krzysztof Helewski1 & Romuald Wojnicz1
1Medical University of Silesia, School of Medicine with the Division of
Dentistry, Chair and Department of Histology and Embryology, Zabrze,
Poland;2Medical University of Silesia, School of Medicine with the
Division of Dentistry, Chair and Clinical Department of General Surgery,
Bytom, Poland.
Introduction
Glycoprotein gp91-phox is an essential component of the NADPH oxidase. The
superoxide-generating NADPH oxidase is present in phagocytes, neuroepithelial
bodies,  vascular  smooth  muscle  cells  and  endothelial  cells.  It  includes  a
membrane-bound flavocytochrome containing two subunits, gp91-phox and p22-
phox. gp91-phox is a significant element of the membrane-bound oxidase of
phagocytes  that  generates  superoxide.  It  is  the  terminal  component  of  a
respiratory chain that transfers single electrons from cytoplasmic NADPH across
the plasma membrane to molecular oxygen on the exterior. This glycoprotein
participates in the regulation of cellular pH and is blocked by zinc. gp91-phox
could be potentially useful in diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism which
is one of the most common endocrine disorders caused by adenoma (80%),
hyperplasia (15%) and carcinoma (5%).
Methods
For immunohistochemistry, parathyroid specimens of patients undertaken surgery
due to primary hyperparathyroidism caused by adenoma and primary hyperplasia
were investigated. Normal healthy tissues served as a control. Frozen sections
were incubated with purified mouse monoclonal antihuman antibodies anti-gp91-
phox. The dilution of the primary antibodies was 1:50 and was verified in a series
of pilot experiments. The immunohistological investigations were performed by
the BrightVision method from ImmunoLogic. The sections were counterstained
with Mayer’s haematoxylin. The number of positively stained cells were counted
and expressed as a mean value of at least 10 high power fields (400!).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
Positive gp91-phox immunoreaction was significantly increased in parathyroid
adenomas, whereas gp91-phox was up-regulated in parathyroid hyperplasias
compared to healthy parathyroid glands. Positively stained cells were localized in
the well vascularized region of the parathyroid nodule.
Conclusions
The immunohistochemical assessment of gp91-phox complements conventional
methods  in  distinguishing  between  parathyroid  hyperplasia  and  adenoma,
however, there is an overlap between these parathyroid lesions and there is no
definite cutoff value.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP640
EP641
Myelolipoma in a rheumatoid arthritis patient - report of a case
Aikaterini Tzanavari1, Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou2, Theodota Banti1,
Charoula Katsavouni1, Eleni Xanthakou3 & Panagiotis Athanassiou1
1Department of Rheumatology, St. Paul’s Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;
2Department of Endocrinology, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece;
3Endocrinologist, Sparti, Greece.
Introduction
Adrenal  myelolipoma  is  an  extremely  rare  benign  adrenal  tumor.  Adrenal
myelolipoma is characterized by the presence within the adrenal gland of mature
adipose tissue and active bone marrow elements. Owing to their non-functional
nature  most  cases  are  incidental,  either  at  autopsy  or  through  computer
tomography scan. Occasionally the lesions attain a large size to become clinically
apparent. Seropositive rheumatoid arthritis is a disorder affecting approximately
1% of the population.
Aim
The aim was to describe the case of a patient with an adrenal myelolipoma who
later developed seropositive rheumatoid arthritis.
Case report
A male patient, aged 42, presented with bilateral symmetric polyarthitis affecting
the small joints of the hands, knees and shoulders. He had morning stiffness
lasting O1 h. Rheumatoid factor was positive and anti-CCP antibodies were
positive. The patient had a history of an adrenal myelolipoma, which was
discovered incidentally at the age of 31 and was removed surgically. The patient
underwent further evaluation for polyarthritis and the diagnosis of rheumatoid
arthritis was made. Methotrexate was administered in a weekly regimen.
Conclusion
Adrenal myelolipoma is a rare benign tumor of the adrenal. Many cases do not
require surgical treatment. In the case described, myelolipoma was surgically
removed, the patient later incidentally developing severe seropositive rheumatoid
arthritis.
Reference
Luo J. et al. Lipoadenoma of the adrenal gland: report of a rare entity and review
of literature. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 2015; 8:9693-7.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP641
EP642
A case of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A with a C634A mutation
and a L769L polymorphism in RET proto-oncogene
Min Jeong Kwon, Taekyoon Kim, Soon Hee Lee & Jeong Hyun Park
Busanpaik Hospital, College of Medicine, Inje University, Busan, Republic
of Korea.
Introduction
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A) is an autosomal dominant
condition characterized by the presence of a medullary thyroid carcinoma,
pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism. The germ-line mutations of the
RET proto-oncogene cause MEN2A. Specific RET mutations correlate with the
onset of age and the aggressiveness of the disease. It has been reported that
polymorphisms of RET may have a modifier effect on the presentation.
Case report
We experienced a case of 27-year-old woman who presented with palpitation and
orthostatic hypotension and was diagnosed with bilateral pheochromocytoma. On
evaluation, each one medullary thyroid carcinoma in both thyroid lobes and a
parathyroid adenoma were found. Genetic testing detected a mutation in codon
634
(C634A, 1900TOC) at exon 11 and a polymorphism in codon 769 (L769L,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
2307TOG) at exon 13 of the RET proto-oncogene. Her father died in a car
accident in youth. Her mother remembered patient’s aunt (father’s sister) living in
Canada, had never seen, had total thyroidectomy in youth.
Conclusion
Patients of MEN2A with a C634A mutation and a L769L polymorphism in RET
proto-oncogene may be presented in younger age and have poor prognosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP642
EP643
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1: an underdiagnosed disorder
Raquel Espírito Santo1, Teresa Sabino1, Edite Filipe2, José Mário
2, Alexandre Vasiljevic3 & Ana Agapito1
Coutinho
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism. Hospital Curry
Cabral, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal;2Department of
Surgery, Hospital Curry Cabral, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon,
Portugal;3Pathology and Neuropathology Centre, Groupement Hospitalier
Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
Introduction
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 is an underdiagnosed autosomal dominant
disorder, with inter and intrafamilial variability without a genotype-phenotype
correlation.
Case report
A young female (born in 1986) presented with galactorrhea and secondary
amenorrhea in 2002, and investigation revealed a prolactinoma. Her brother (born
in 1982) presenting gynecomastia and erectile dysfunction at age 21, was also
diagnosed with prolactinoma. The female was referred to our appointment in
2013 due to pancreatic tumors, treated with cabergoline. Laboratory: prolactin
44 ng/ml
[1.9-25],  GH
25.8 ng/ml
[0.06-5],  IGF1
1.208 ng/ml
[117-329],
OGTT: GH basal/nadir 18.5/12.1 ng/ml; calcium 11.3 mg/dl [8.4-10.2], PTH
95 pg/ml [10-70]. VIP, gastrin, glucagon, insulin, chromogranin-A: normal.
Thoraco-abdominopelvic-CT: lesions on pancreatic tail with 40!27!36 mm
and 7 mm; heterogeneous liver mass 48!49!51 mm. Octreoscan: two focus of
hyperfixation in pancreas. Biopsy: pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor with liver
infiltration. MRI revealed diffuse pituitary hyperplasia. Subtotal parathyroidect-
omy,  distal  pancreatectomy  and  liver  metastasectomy  were  performed.
Histopathologic examination: pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, Ki-67!2%;
secondary infiltration of liver. After surgery: IGF1 424 ng/ml, OGTT basal/nadir
0.6/0.25 ng/ml, calcium 10.3 mg/dl. Octreoscan and abdominal-CT were negative
4
months  later.  MRI  revealed  regression  of  pituitary  hyperplasia.  GHRH
immunohistochemical study on pancreatic tumors was negative. Family study
was performed: brother underwent total pancreatectomy due to non-functioning
pancreatic tumors; 60-year-old father: evidence of bronchopulmonary carcinoid
tumor, non-functioning pancreatic tumors, primary hyperparathyroidism. Family
DNA sequence analysis of the MEN1 gene identified a germinal mutation on exon
2: deletion of 4bp involving codon 88, not yet described.
Conclusions
The occurrence of prolactinoma at a young age in two siblings should have
prompted a genetic basis investigation, possibly implying a different prognosis in
this family. The diagnosis of acromegaly in the female patient, its etiology and
pituitary imaging need to be further elucidated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP643
EP644
A case of recurred parathyroid carcinoma with multiple lymph node
metastasis: concurrent with papillary thyroid cancer
Hyoung Woo Lee1, Ho Jin Kim1, Jun Sung Moon1, Ji Sung Yoon1,
Kyu Chang Won1 & Ji Eun Lee2
1
Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam University College of
Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea;2Department of Internal Medicine,
CHA University Hospital, Gumi, Kyeongsangbuk-do, Republic of Korea.
Parathyroid carcinoma, a rare endocrine malignancy, accounting for only 1-2%
of patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (HPT). In addition, a few case have
been reported coexistence of parathyroid carcinoma and papillary thyroid cancer.
Here, we present a case of recurred parathyroid cancer with multiple lymph node
metastasis. A 57-year-old women was presented with high serum calcium level
(14.4 mg/dl) in medical check-up. Hyperparathyroidism was considered to be the
reason of hypercalcemia because of significantly increased parathyroid hormone
(PTH, 1275 pg/ml) levels. Neck ultrasonography (US) at that time showed
0.7w4.5 cm sized multiple thyroid nodules at both lobes. Tc-99m sestamibi scan
demonstrated marked increased radiotracer activity in the region of the inferior
left  lobe  of  the  thyroid.  She  underwent  left  parathyroidectomy,  total
thyroidectomy and central compartment lymph node dissection. Histopathology
revealed that the 4.5 cm mass adjacent to the left thyroid lobe was a parathyroid
carcinoma with evidence of vascular invasion. As well, she was found to have a
1.3 cm papillary thyroid cancer in the right thyroid lobe and a 1.5 cm follicular
adenoma in the left side. Serum calcium and PTH returned to the normal range
after surgery, but she developed a recurrence 2 years later (2 ! 0.5 cm, isoechoic
nodule at left operative bed). Re-exploration revealed recurrence at the previous
surgery site. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT)
revealed intense hypermetabolic lesions on Left operative bed and cervical level
VI, VII, and whole body bone, which were thus thought to be local recurrence of
parathyroid cancer. At third operation, 5!9 cm sized soft, well demarcated mass
was found at previous op site, and enlarged lymph nodes were detected at level
coincide  with  PET-CT  image.  Pathologic  report  confirmed  diagnosis  of
metastatic parathyroid carcinoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP644
EP645
Postprandial hypoglycemia in the presence of insulinoma - case report
Askin Gungunes1, Senay Arikan Durmaz1, Dilek Oguz2 & Serkan Rendeci3
1Department of Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Kirikkale University,
Kirikkale, Turkey;2Department of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine,
Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Department of Internal Medicine,
School of Medicine, Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey.
Background and aim
Although  insulinoma  typically  causes  fasting  hypoglycemia,  postprandial
hypoglycemia occasionally reported in these patients. We aimed to report a
rare case of insulinoma who atmitted to outpatient clinic with postprandial
hypoglycemia.
Case report
A 31-year-old  woman  was  admitted  to  outpatient  clinic  with  postprandial
hypoglycemia. Capillary blood glucose levels were found 25 and 27 mg /dl during
typical  hypoglycemic  symptoms  such  as  blurred  vision,  palpitations,  and
weakness. These hypoglycemic episodes occured about 2 hours after eating and
eliminated with sugary foods. The symptoms of hypoglycemia were decreased
with  diet  modification  and  increase  in  meal  frequency.  After
6
months,
hypoglycemic symptoms reappeared by exercise and delayed meals. Her physical
examination was normal except hepatomegaly. Blood samples were taken after an
overnight fast and serum blood glucose 91 mg/dl, insulin 5.64 uU/ml, kortizol
19.3 mg/dl, and c-peptide 1.14 ng/ml. Hb A1C, thyroid function tests, insulin like
growht factor-1, anti- insulin antibody, liver and renal function tests were in
normal range. Prolonged- 72 hours- fasting test was performed. After 56 hours,
inappropriately high serum insulin concentration was showed during hypogly-
cemia. Endoscopic ultrasound showed 9,8 mm hypoechoic lesion in the head of
the pancreas. Present findings suggested the presence of insulinoma. Operation
was planned but not yet carried out.
Conclusions
Fasting  hypoglycemia  is the  common  clinical  manifestation  of  insulinoma.
However, postprandial hypoglycemia rarely observed in this situation. It is
important to consider insulinoma as a cause of postprandial hypoglycemia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP645
EP646
A novel mutation of the menin gene in a family with multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1
Suleyman Nahit Sendur, Ahmet Dogrul, Serkan Kabacam,
Osman Abbasoglu, Sevgen Onder, Cenk Sokmensuer, Belkis Erbas,
Selcuk Dagdelen, Mehmet Alikasifoglu & Tomris Erbas
Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominant genetic
disorder characterized  by parathyroid  adenomas,  enteropancreatic  endocrine
tumors and anterior pituitary adenomas. It is caused by inactivating mutations of
the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene, encoding menin (chromosome 11q13). A large
family with several members affected were evaluated for clinical and genetic
characteristic of MEN1.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
The index male patient (42 yr) presented with symptoms of hypoglycemia and
hypercalcemia.  Abdominal  MRI  revealed  a  mass  at  distal  pancreas. Distal
pancreatectomy was performed. Glucagon, synaptophysin and chromogranin
were positive on immunostaining, but insulin was negative. Total parathy-
roidectomy  was  performed  and  on  pathology,  parathyroid  hyperplasia  was
diagnosed. His pituitary MRI and hormone levels were normal. Because the index
patient had developed two tumor types associated with MEN1, genetic analysis
was performed. Genetic analysis identified a novel mutation on chromosome
11q13.1 which was c.218insGGCGGCAC heterozygote.
Case 2 (21 yr) is the son of index case. He had primary hyperparathyroidism.
Total parathyroidectomy was performed. Two neuroendocrine tumor was defined
at pancreas.
Case 3 (45 yr) is the sister of index case. She had primary hyperparathyroidism
with parathyroid hyperplasia.
Case
4
(50
yr)  is  the  other  sister  of  index  case.  She  had  primary
hyperparathyroidism. She has four non-fonctional neuroendocrine tumor on
pancreas, all of which are stable in size.
Case 5 (27 yr) is the son of case 4. He had primary hyperparathyroidism. He went
to surgery for parathyroid hyperplasia. He is waiting for pancreas surgery for
21 mm pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor.
Case 6 (24 yr) is the daughter of case 4. Despite in-vitro fertilization methods, she
was  unable  to  conceive.  After  parathyroid  surgery,  she  became  pregnant
spontaneously.
We conclude that MEN1 in this large family was associated with a previously
unidentified mutation of the menin gene. MEN1 genetic analysis facilitates
clinical management and provides benefits to patients and families with MEN1.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP646
EP647
Multiple liver-directed therapy including theraspheres for recurrent
metastatic jejeunal carcinoid tumor
Budoor Al Emadi, Mohammed Ahmed, Hamad Alsuhaibani, Tarek Amin,
Hindi Al Hindi & Mahmoud Tuli
King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Introduction
Majority of patients with neuroendocrine tumors (NET) harbor hepatic metastases
at presentation, posing therapeutic challenge. Multiple liver-directed treatment
modalities  have  been  employed  with  variable  success.  Herein  is  presented
successful outcome in a patient whose recurrent metastatic liver metastases from
NET was managed using multidisciplinary approach.
Case report
We present long-term18-years course of a patient with liver metastases from
midgut carcinoid. She had successful outcome using repeated surgery, radio-
frequency ablation, octreotide, and therasphere therapy in succession. Minimally
invasive therapy of therasphere using transarterial yettrium 90 can be used safely
for recurrent hepatic metastatic neuroendocrine tumor.
A 61-year old female with hepatic metastases from non-functioning jejunal
carcinoid had resection of 25 cm of small bowel containing 5 cm of carcinoid
tumor, resection of 5 cm mesenteric metastatic lymph node, resection of hepatic
segments 3 and 4 containing the tumor measuring 7.5 cm. This was followed 10
years later by resection and radioablation of recurrent hepatic metastases. Two
years later MRI and octreoscan revealed multiple liver metastases, with abnormal
circulating  CGA
(100
ng/ml;  Ref.
!93)  and  received  on  going  monthly
octreotide injections. Four years later liver metastases progresses with additional
lesions. Liver biopsy revealed metastatic neuroendocrine grade 2 tumor (Ki-67
index 4.5%). In view of her diabetes PRRT was not given; instead she received
therasphere therapy. 90 yttrium, tumor dose 164 Gy was injected into left hepatic
artery. Patient tolerated it well with no side effects. A year later MRI showed
resolution of tumor with atrophic left lobe, and hypertrophic right lobe.
Conclusion
Majority of patients with neuroendocrine tumors present with liver metastases.
Despite  therapeutic  challenge;  hepatic  metastases  can  be  managed  by  a
combination of surgical, radioablation, medical and radioembolization therapy
using Yttrium 90.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP647
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP648
Clinical case of rare adrenal tumor - schwannoma
Natalya Volkova1, Mariya Porksheyan1, Oleg Kyt2, Saida Kanaeva1 &
Sergey Dimitriadi2
1Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia;2Rostov
Scientific and Research Institute of Oncology, Rostov-on-Don, Russia.
Background
Schwannoma (Sch) is a rare peripheral nerve sheath tumor comprised entirely of
neoplastic Schwann cells. Adrenal Sch are extremely rare. Most adrenal Sch are
incidental, and patients with Sch may not have any complaints. Here we present
the  clinical  case  of  giant  adrenal  Sch,  which  caused  hematuria  and  had
indiscriminating organ origin on MRI.
Clinical case
Woman, 58 y.o., was consulted by urologist because of painless macrohematuria.
Abdomen MRI was performed, it revealed giant mass (14!13!11 cm) with
cystic degeneration and calcification, which was located in retroperitoneum.
Patient was consulted by endocrinologist, typical testing was done. Plasma
cortisol  after
1-mg  DST  was  48  nmol/l  (!50  nmol/l),
24-hour  urinary
fractionated metanephrines were 59 mg (!320 mg), 24-hour urinary fractionated
normetanephrines were 144 mg (!390 mg). Because of heterogeneous structure,
normal  level  of  catecholamine  metabolites,  absence  of  known  cancer  in
anamnesis, adrenocortical carcinoma was strongly suspected. Right laparotomic
adrenalectomy was  performed  without  any intraoperative  and  postoperative
complications.  Immunohistochemical  assay  showed  that  tumor  cells  were
positive for S-100 protein and vimentin, which was consistent with schwannoma.
Since Sch may be associated with syndromic diagnosis of schwannomatosis or
neurofibromatosis type 2, the genetic testing was performed. No any associated
mutations were revealed. Therefore, the diagnosis of sporadic adrenal Sch was
established. Further follow up during a year didn’t show signs of recurrence.
Conclusions
Firstly, because of rarity of adrenal Sch, it is of great importance to describe any
case in order to understand true prevalence and natural history of the disease.
Secondly,  Sch  as  may  be  discovered  incidental,  as  may  be  non-specific
symptomatic. In latter case, it is very important that different specialists tightly
interact with each other. Thirdly, the preoperative diagnosis of Sch is impossible
in most cases, that’s why strict following to diagnostic protocols is demanded in
order to exclude all other causes of incidentalomas firstly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP648
EP649
The contribution of fast test in the diagnostic approach of hypoglycemia
in non-diabetic patients
Radhouen Gharbi, Fatma Chaker, Melika Chihaoui, Syrine Danguir,
Mariem Yazidi, Ons Rejeb & Hedia Slimane
Faculty of medecine, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Hypoglycemia is an uncommon complaint among non diabetic patients. The aim
of this study was to determine the role of fast test in the diagnostic approach to
hypoglycemia.
Patients and methods
It was a retrospective study, including 40 patients admitted in the endocrinology
department from 2001 to 2015 for hypoglycemia signs. We collected clinical and
biologic data, fast test results and final diagnosis of hypoglycemia.
Results
The mean age was 46 years [G19.1]. 57.5% of the patients were women. The
mean duration of symptoms was 33 weeks [G55]. Sixty five percent had
neuroglycopenic signs. The mean capillary blood glucose was 0.38 g/l [G0.15].
Two  patients  had  adrenal  insufficiency,  and
3
had  sulfamid  induced
hypoglycemia. Supervised fast test was undertaken in 20 patients. In 2 patients
hypoglycemia occurred in the first 24 h, and final diagnosis was insulinoma in
both cases. In 3 patients fast test was stopped because of non hypoglycemic
symptoms, and 5 patients stopped voluntarily the test. five hours glucose tolerance
test was performed in 25 patients: Reactive hypoglycemia was diagnosed in
77.5%; 68% had glucose tolerance abnormalities.
Conclusion
Insulinoma was diagnosed in 5% of the patients admitted for hypoglycemia. The
two cases was identified by a hypoglycemia occurring during the first day fast test.
To confirm organic  hypoglycemia,  fast test  is a chief pattern but  other
investigations are often necessary.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP649
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP650
Evaluation of postmenopausal hyperandrogenism - case report
Mariana Tomé Fernández-Ladreda1, Guillermo Martínez De Pinillos2 &
Eyvee Arturo Cuéllar2
1Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospitalpunta De Europa, Algeciras
(CADIZ), Spain;2Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital DE Valme,
Sevilla, Spain.
Introduction
Evaluation of postmenopausal hyperandrogenism may be a challenge for physicians
as it is necessary to exclude the presence of the relatively rare but potentially life-
threatening underlying tumorous causes. We report the case of a postmenopausal
woman who presented with clinical and biochemical hyperandrogenism.
Case Report
We present the case of a 65 year-old woman being followed at our clinic because of
mild hypothyroidism. At inspection we observed severe hirsutism (20 points on
Ferriman-Gallway scale). Patient referred increased facial hair in the last year. No
other signs such as baldness or voice changes were detected. She referred regular
menses until menopause at the age of 49. Total testosterone levels were increased
(2.28 ng/ml) with normal concentration of adrenal androgens (DHEA-S) in several
determinations. A vaginal ultrasound was performed showing no alterations,
CT-scan showed a 2 cm lesion in left adrenal gland suggestive of adrenal adenoma.
Abdominal MRI showed a nodule of 2.2 cm on the right ovary suggestive of mioma
and less likely of an ovary tumor. Despite the presence of an adrenal adenoma,
suspecting ovary hyperandrogenism we decided to perform laparoscopic bilateral
oophorectomy. An steroid cell tumor of 1.5 cm was detected on the right ovary on
histological evaluation. After surgery, testosterone levels returned to normal and
our patient has observed improvement in hirsutism and other signs of virilization.
Conclusions
Hyperandrogenism  after  menopause  is  a  rare  condition  that  needs  careful
evaluation in order not to misdiagnose an underlying androgen-secreting tumor.
Clinical phenotype and symptom onset do not reliably permit discrimination
between tumorous and nontumorous causes, but may help to guide the diagnosis.
Imaging tests not always show the origin of hyperandrogenism and occasionally
may mislead the diagnosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP650
EP651
Hirsutism with rapid onset presenting in a 62-year-old postmenopausal
woman
Ioannis Tzaves1, Georgios Papadakis1, Konstantinos Moustakas1,
Ioannis Keramidas1, Victoria Kaltzidou1, Eirini Veniou1,
Nikolaos Kalinoglou2 & Athanasia Tertipi1
1Department of Endocrinology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus,
Athens, Greece;2Department of Gynecology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital,
Pireaus, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Virilizing tumors are rare, but frequent cause of virilization in postmenopausal
women.
Case report
A 62-year-old postmenopausal woman presented with a rapid onset of hirsutism
with increased terminal hair growth, particular on chin and abdomen, frontal male
pattern balding in the last 5 months. Physical examination revealed a low-pitched,
deepened  voice  and  clitoromegaly.  The  Ferriman-Gallwey  score  was
18.
Laboratory  evaluation:  Testosterone:
11.2 ng/ml
(nr  for  women
0.07-0.65),
DHEAS 154.4 mg/dl (24.6-182.3), 17OHP 0.5 ng/ml (0.19-0.71), D4A 1.4 ng/ml
(0.3-3.7), FSH 11.6 IU/l (27.7-93.3), LH 1.6 IU/l (14.4-52.8), PRL 6 ng/ml
(1.9-17.9), E2  91.7 pg/ml (6-53). On a 48-h low-dose (2 mg/day) dexametha-
sone-suppression test, testosterone showed only a 24% reduction from baseline,
while DHEAS was practically unchanged. A pelvis MRI scanning revealed
normal adrenal glands and enlargement of the right ovary with an echogenic solid
mass measuring 3.6!3.7!4 cm and a laparoscopic right salpingo-oophorectomy
was performed. Histopathology revealed a Leydig cell tumor with no malignant
features.
Conclusions
Hyperandrogenism and especially virilization in menopausal women has to be
investigated thoroughly, since the percentage of virilizing tumors of adrenal or
ovarian origin is much higher in menopause than during reproductive age.
Ovarian virilizing tumors are usually benign and the treatment of choice is
surgical removal.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP651
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP652
Clinical presentations and genetic analyses of patients with multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2A: a single thai tertiary center experience
Nitchakarn Laichuthai, Natnicha Houngngam, Sarat Sunthornyothin &
Thiti Snabboon
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Introduction
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) is an autosomal dominant
disorder from a RET proto-oncogene mutation, characterized by the presence of
medullary  thyroid  carcinoma
(MTC),  pheochromocytoma  and/or  primary
hyperparathyroidism.
Materials and Methods
A retrospective study of 5 probands (3 males and 2 females, age range 31-46
years) and 6 family members (2 males and 4 females, age range 2-50 years)
diagnosed as MEN 2A at King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Bangkok,
Thailand, during 2000-2015 was performed. Direct sequencing of the RET gene
successfully identified all mutant alleles of the affected individuals. Demographic
data, clinical profiles, mutation types and genotype-phenotype correlation were
analyzed.
Results
At the diagnosis, four probands had pheochromocytoma and MTC whereas the
other one developed all three. Of the pheochromocytoma, all of them were
benign, 60% (3/5) were bilateral and 60% (3/5) were the presenting tumors. Two
of the probands initially presented with MTC with multiple foci at the diagnosis.
Hyperparathyroidism due to hyperplasia was identified in one case. All the
affected subjects responded well to standard treatment of each tumor except one
that was delayed in diagnosis resulting in fatal outcome. Two distinct mutations
which all located in codon 634 of exon 11 in RET gene, C634S (60%) and C634R
(40%), were detected. A prophylactic thyroidectomy based on a classification of
RET  mutations  in  an  asymptomatic  MTC  10-year-old  girl  was  performed
successfully.
Conclusions
Screening and early detection of MEN2A mutation carriers are very effective
clinical intervention. As described in the literature, MTC is usually the first
manifestation in patients with MEN 2A; however, pheochromocytoma may be the
presenting tumor due to its alarming symptoms. In this study the identified
frequent loci of the RET gene will facilitate the molecular diagnosis of MEN 2A
in Thai patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP652
EP653
Multiple complications of severe hyperandrogenism in a
postmenopausal woman
Cristina Capatina1,2, Alexandru Scafa-Udriste1, Adela Ghinea2,
Anda Dumitrascu2 & Catalina Poiana1,2
1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;
2CI Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Severe hyperandrogenism is not only associated with cosmetic concerns but it
also increases the risk of neoplastic (endometrial, breast cancer), cardiovascular,
respiratory and metabolic complications.
Case report
A 68 years-old woman with a recent history of severe arterial hypertension,
cardiogenic  pulmonary  edema,  diabetes  mellitus,  severe  respiratory  failure,
marked obesity was referred to our department due to the markedly androgenic
phenotype.
Clinical examination showed android obesity, severe male-pattern alopecia,
marked hirsutism involving the face and the trunk, deepening of the voice. Severe,
resistant arterial hypertension with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and congestive
heart failure was present. The patient associated chronic respiratory failure,
severe  obstructive  sleep  apnea  syndrome,  diabetes  mellitus.  The  endocrine
evaluation  revealed  an  extremely  elevated  serum  testosterone  level
(O16.6 ng/ml), high serum estradiol (186 pg/ml) with low gonadotropins (FSH
0.3 mIU/ml, LH 0.42 mIU/ml), normal adrenal function, with normal androste-
nedione, DHEAS and 17OHP levels. Computed tomography of the abdomen
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
showed normal adrenal glands, right ovarian tumor, markedly increased uterine
volume with severe endometrial hyperplasia. Surgery was recommended and
performed very recently with significant clinical improvement.
Conclusions
The  presence  of  severe  hyperandrogenism  in  postmenopausal  women  is
frequently the result of an androgen-secreting tumor and can be associated with
important complications
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP653
EP654
Incidentaloma. Myxoid adrenal adenoma
Jose Alvaro Romero Porcel, Guillermo Martinez De Pinillos Gordillo,
Eyvee Arturo Cuellar Lloclla, Fernando Garcia Perez, Mariola
Mendez Muros, Mariana Tome Fernandez-Ladreda, Jose Ignacio
Fernandez Pen˜a, Juan Manuel Garcia De Quiros, Jose Ignacio
Fernandez Lopez & Maria Victoria Cozar Leon
Hospital Universitario de Valme, Seville, Spain.
Introduction
Myxoid tumors of the adrenal glands constitute an unusual entity and should
be part of the differential diagnosis of atypical adenomas in the study of adrenal
incidentaloma.
Description of methods
We report the finding of myxoid adrenal adenoma in left adrenal gland in a
38-year-old woman.
Case
PMH: Active smoker. Non hypertension, type 2 diabetes or dyslipidemia. No
constitutional symptoms.
Physical  examination:  no  signs  of  hypercortisolism.  Weight
164 kg,  BMI
18 kg/m2, MAP 120 - 70 mmHg.
38-year-old woman studied by mixed urinary incontinence. Ultrasound define
mass in left adrenal gland hypoechoic, homogeneous and well-defined contours,
non calcifications of 4.6!4.7!4.2 cm.
Abdominal MRI was requested later to define a left adrenal mass of 6!5.3 cm,
heterogeneous,  contours  defined:  differential  diagnosis  between  atypical
adenomas (on MRI if it becomes apparent signal loss in “out of phase”),
pheochromocytoma (that is hyperintense on T2) and adrenal carcinoma (for size
and heterogeneity presented).
The study of functionality intervention was normal functionality. It was operated
by the imagining radiological characteristics of suspected neoplasia and being
larger than 4 cm.
After laparoscopic left adrenalectomy was made, study concludes that it was
pseudoglandular myxoid adrenal adenoma.
Currently has good clinical and laboratory evolution.
Conclusions
Pseudoglandular myxoid adrenal gland adenoma is a rare variant of myxoid
adenomas. The radiological characteristics are variables. The definitive diagnosis
is  provided  by  pathologic  examination.  The  evolution  of  myxoid  benign
adenomas is similar that conventional ones.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP654
EP655
Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome with musculoskeletal manifestations.
report of a case
Panagiotis Athanassiou1, Aikaterini Tzanavari1, Eleni Pantazi2,
Anestis Spyridis1 & Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou3
1Department of Rheumatology, St. Paul’s Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;
22nd Department of Endocrinology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens, Greece;
3Department of Endocrinology, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome is an inherited disorder characterized by
the formation of tumors and cysts in diverse organ systems. Tumors may be
malignant  or  benign  and  they  tend  to  appear  during  young  adulthood.
Hemangioblastomas are characteristic of VHL syndrome.
Aim
The aim was to describe the case of a patient with VHL syndrome presenting with
musculoskeletal manifestations and multiple tumors.
Case report
A patient female, aged 51 years, presented with painful 1st  and 3rd  MCP and
proximal  PP  joints.  The  patient  complained  of  dry  mouth  and  dry  eyes.
Laboratory investigations revealed positive RF test. The patient had a 10-year
history of insulin treated diabetes mellitus type 2 on insulin and antidiabetic
drugs. At the age of 27 the patient developed loss of balance, headaches and
vision  problems.  An  MRI  performed  revealed  a  hemangioblastoma  of  the
cerebellum. The diagnosis of VHL syndrome was made. At the age of 49 she
presented with multiple hemangioblastomas of the cerebellum and the spinal
cord. There were multiple cases of VHL syndrome within the family. Her mother
was diagnosed with VHL at the age of 57, had multiple hemangioblastomas in the
CNS and died from clear cell renal carcinoma aged 73. Her sister has also
multiple  hemangioblastomas  and  has  been  diagnosed  with  clear  cell  renal
carcinoma and has also VHL. Her first son was diagnosed with VHL at the age of
12, developed multiple hemangioblastomas in the CNS causing tetraplegia and
died aged 25. Her second son has multiple hemangioblastomas in the cerebellum,
a pancreatic serous cystadenoma and had a retinal angioma in the right eye with
subsequent  loss  of  vision.  Her
2
nephews  also  suffer  from  multiple
hemangioblastomas in the CNS, one of them having a retinal angioma.
Conclusion
The extremely rare case of a patient with VHL syndrome and diabetes mellitus
type 2 is described. The syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern,
thus patients present with multiple cases within the family.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP655
EP656
Insulinoma misdiagnosed as neurologic disease
Judite Salavessa, Vânia Gomes, Cristina Alcântara & Florbela Ferreira
Hospital de Santa Maria - Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction
Insulinoma is a rare pancreatic endocrine tumor derived from ß cells that secret
insulin, which results in hypoglycemia. Most are benign and solitary. The median
age at diagnosis is about 47 years. The age range for peak incidence is between 30
and 60 years and it is more prevalent in women. Diagnosis relies on clinical
features along with laboratory tests and imaging. However, the nonspecific
symptoms and small size of these tumors can lead to difficulties of diagnosis and
localization.
Case report
An 84 years old man was admitted to the emergency department with seizures and
severe hypoglycemia (44 mg/dl). The patient have had a previous history of
fatigue, dizziness and tremors since the past two years, diagnosed as Parkinson’s
disease.
72 hour fast test showed increased levels of insulin
(7.1 mUI/ml),
C-peptide (2.21 ng/ml) and pro-insulin (51.7 pmol/l). Screening for sulfonylurea,
anti-insulin antibodies and anti-insulin receptor antibodies was negative.
MEN 1 syndrome was excluded. The abdominal CT scan revealed a 12 mm
nodule in the uncinate process of the pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasonography was
performed and biopsy was suggestive of a neuroendocrine tumor.
The patient was discharged in euglycemia, under diazoxide and poli-fractionated
diet, pending surgical decision.
Surgical resection was performed and histopathology was consistent with the
diagnosis  of  benign  insulinoma.  The  clinical  course  was  favourable,  with
regression of symptoms without diazoxide.
Conclusion
Insulinoma remains a diagnostic challenge since symptoms are nonspecific and
may lead to incorrect diagnosis. As in this clinical case, a neurologic disease
might be considered the culprit.
We discuss the importance of considering the diagnosis, since  it is easily
confirmed by standard endocrine tests and can be potentially curable through
surgical resection. On the other hand severe and sustained hypoglycemia can lead
to disability and death.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP656
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Female Reproduction
EP657
Immunity to Haemophilus influenzae B and Peumococcal vaccination
among adult women with Turner Syndrome
Jakub Bukowczan1, Aaron Liew1, Graham Roberts2, Gavin Spickett1 &
Richard Quinton1
1The Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle,
UK;2University Waterford Hospital, Waterford, Ireland.
Introduction
Turner Syndrome (TS) is associated with a higher overall morbidity and mortality
than the general population, with respiratory diseases as one of the major causes.
Haemophilus influenza type B (HiB) and pneumococcal (PC) vaccination can
reduce morbidity and mortality, by alleviating the risk of respiratory diseases. All
patients in the Newcastle Adult Turner Syndrome clinic who lack immunity to
either HiB or PC at baseline receive vaccination in our TS clinic. However, the
response rate following vaccination has not hitherto been examined.
Methods
We prospectively examined the response rate to HiB and PC vaccination among
a cohort of 100 consecutive adult women with TS. In our laboratory, the antibody
titres at the protective range were 1-20 and 20-200 mg/L, for HiB and PC
antigens,  respectively.  Patients  with  titres  below  these  lower  limits  were
considered to have inadequate immunity and vaccination was administered in
primary care (Pneumovax or Menitorix).
Results
A total of 96 eligible TS patients aged R18 years were reported. The median age
and BMI were 31.5 (24.8-45.0) years and 26.1 (23.2-30.7) kg/m2, respectively.
At baseline, 54.2% (52/96) and 18.8% (18/96) of patients had inadequate antibody
response to HiB and PC vaccines, respectively. Intriguingly, 27.5% (14/51)
patients in the former and 38.9% (7/18) in the latter, also had a low IgM level
(!0.71). Furthermore, 7.8% (4/51) and 16.7% (3/18) had a low IgG level (!5.8),
respectively.
Conclusions
The prevalence of protective antibodies to HiB and PC among adult women with
TS were low in this cohort, underpinning the importance of screening and
vaccination to achieve protective titres, thereby potentially reducing related
morbidity and mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP657
EP658
Sex hormone and steroid precursor measurement by simple and rapid
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (Lc-Ms/Ms)
method: comparison with current routine immunoassays
Flaminia Fanelli, Marco Mezzullo, Alessia Fazzini, Margherita Baccini,
Alessandra Gambineri, Valentina Vicennati, Carla Pelusi, Renato Pasquali
& Uberto Pagotto
Endocrinology Unit, Center for Applied Biomedical Research, Department
of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna - S.Oorsola-
Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
Though LC-MS/MS is replacing immunoassays for major glucocorticoids and
androgens  routine  assessment,  the  measurement  of  other  sex  steroids  and
precursors  is  still  challenging  and  available  only  in  experienced  research
laboratories. Our aim was to develop a simple-prep and rapid 2D-LC-MS/MS
method  for  the  simultaneous  measurement  of  estrone
(E1),  estradiol
(E2),
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and 17OHpregnenolone.
Serum volumes of 300ul were spiked with internal standards and processed by
single-step  liquid-liquid-extraction.  Extracts  were  injected  onto  Prominence
HPLC - LCMS-8050 triple-quadrupole platform (Shimadzu). Analytes were
purified by perfusion column, separated on a Gemini C6-phenyl (100!2 mm,
5 um) column (Phenomenex), ionized by electrospray and detected by specific
multiple reaction monitoring transition in 11min run. The method showed high
functional sensitivity
(E2 and DHT: 9.8 pg/ml, E1: 4.9 pg/ml, 17OHpregne-
nolone: 39.1 pg/ml), proper accuracy (86.4-102.1%) and intra- (0.9-4.9%) and
inter-assay (2.1-11.6%) imprecision. Sex and age specific reference intervals
were estimated. The LC-MS/MS method was compared with routine E1 and E2
immunoassays. The Passing&Bablok analysis revealed high correlation between
Roche-Modular III ECLIA and LC-MS/MS for E2 measurement both at all values
(nZ82; r:0.991) and at E2 levels !100 pg/ml (nZ28; r:0.960), with respectively
slight or absent proportional (slope (90CI): 1.06 (1.02-1.09) and 096 (0.85-1.11))
and systematic (intercept (90CI): K5.50 (K10.4-K1.68) and K0.78 (K6.94-
4.96)) bias. DSL8700 direct RIA for E1 measurement showed poor correlation
with LC-MS/MS (nZ42; r:0.872), with relevant proportional (slope (90CI): 076
(063-0.94)) and systematic (intercept (90CI): 18.4 (9.4-22.9)) bias.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
The LC-MS/MS assay showed optimal performance to sensitively and accurately
determine  routinely-assayed  estrogens,  confirming  the  reliability  of  new-
generation  ECLIA  for  E2,  and  highlighting  direct  RIA  unreliability  in
determining E1. The assay further allowed the determination of important though
not-routinely assayed DHT and 17OHpregnenolone. The bench- and run-time
required by the LC-MS/MS method allow the integration of steroid profiling
capability both in research and clinical settings.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP658
EP659
Association between prolonged breastfeeding and bone mineral density
and osteoporosis in postmenopausal women: KNHANES 2010-2011
Sung-Woo Kim1, Kwi-Hyun Bae1, Jae-Han Jeon1, Yeon-Kyung Choi1,
Mi-Kyung Kim2, Hye-Soon Kim2, Hyun-Ae Seo3, Eui Hyun Kim3 &
Keun-Gyu Park1
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu,
Republic of Korea;2Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Internal Medicine, Keimyung University School of
Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea;3Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, Daegu Fatima Hospital,
Daegu, Republic of Korea.
Abstract withdrawn.
EP660
Increased adipsin is associated with carotid intima media thickness and
metabolic disturbances in polycystic ovary syndrome
Gokcen Unal Kocabas1, Ozlem Gursoy Calan2, Mehmet Calan1, Pinar
Yesil Senses3, Ebru Ozden4, Kerime Rumeysa Sari4, Merve Kocar Aktar4,
Cetin Imamoglu5, Yasar Mehmet Senses6, Giray Bozkaya7 & Oktay Bilgir4
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism Bozyaka Training and
Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey;2Department of Biochemistry and
Clinical Biochemistry Dokuz Eylul University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir,
Turkey;3Department of Bioengineering, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey;
4Department of Internal Medicine Bozyaka Training and Research Hospital,
Izmir, Turkey;5Department of Radiology Bozyaka Training and Research
Hospital, Izmir, Turkey;6Department of Biotechnology, Ege University,
Izmir, Turkey;7Department of Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry
Bozyaka Training and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
Context
Adipsin, a protein secreted  mainly from the adipose tissue, is a structural
homologous of complement factor D, a rate-limiting enzyme of the alternative
complement system. Growing evidence suggests that the alternative complement
system plays a role both in the regulation of energy homeostasis and the
atherosclerotic process. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an inflammatory
based-metabolic disease.
Objective
To ascertain whether circulating adipsin levels are altered in women with PCOS,
and whether there is association between adipsin and metabolic parameters or
carotid intima media thickness (CIMT).
Participants
Hundred and forty four women with PCOS and 144 age- and BMI-matched
controls without PCOS were recruited for this cross-sectional study.
Main Outcome Measures
Circulating adipsin levels were measured using ELISA. Metabolic, hormonal
parameters and CIMT were also determined.
Results
Circulating adipsin levels were significantly elevated in women with PCOS
compared  with  controls
(91.52G14.11
vs
60.31G9.71 ng/ml,  P!0.001).
Adipsin levels positively correlated with BMI, homeostasis model assessment
of insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR), total & free-testosterone, high sensitivity
C-reactive  protein
(hs-CRP),  triglycerides  and  CIMT.  Multivariate  logistic
regression analyses revealed that the odds ratio for PCOS was 3.25 for patients in
the highest quartile of adipsin compared with those in the lowest quartile (ORZ
3.25, 95% CIZ2.64-4.00, PZ0.016). Our findings further indicate that BMI,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
HOMA-IR, hs-CRP and free-testosterone are independent factors influencing
serum adipsin levels and that adipsin is an independent predictor for CIMT.
Conclusion
Adipsin might contribute to the development PCOS as well as the cardiovascular
risks and metabolic disturbances associated with the disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP660
EP661
Follicular fluid Bisphenol A levels are higher and correlate negatively
with the number of oocytes in women with tubal factor infertility
compared to women with polycystic ovary syndrome
Georgios Boutzios1,2, Areti Mina2, Ioannis Papoutsis3, Sotiris Athanaselis3,
Panagiotis Christopoulos2, Minas Mastrominas4, Eleni Kousta2 &
George Mastorakos2
1Endocrine Unit, Department of Pathophysiology, Laiko University
Hospital, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece;
2Endocrine Unit, Aretaieion University Hospital, Medical School,
University of Athens, Athens, Greece;3Department of Forensic Medicine
and Toxicology, School of Medicine, University of Athens, Athens, Greece;
4Embryogenesis, Assisted Conception Unit, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Bisphenol A (BPA) is a chemical compound found in a variety of everyday
products. Exposure to BPA impacts negatively ovarian response, number of
fertilized oocytes and implantation in women undergoing in vitro fertilization
(IVF). The aim of the study was to determine BPA levels in women with
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in comparison to women with tubal factor
(TF) infertility who underwent IVF as well as to investigate their effect in critical
endpoints of IVF such as number of oocytes and IVF outcome.
Material and Methods
Eighty two women in reproductive age (41 with PCOS and 41 normo-ovulatory
with TF infertility) who underwent IVF were included in a prospective controlled
study. A novel gas chromatography-mass spectrometry method was developed
to determine BPA levels in serum, urine and follicular fluid (FF). Anthropometric,
metabolic, and hormonal parameters were assessed.
Results
Higher BPA levels were detected in serum (0.780 ng/ml vs 0.580 ng/ml, NS) and
FF (1.128 ng/ml vs 0.505 ng/ml, P!0.05) but lower in urine (0.985 ng/ml vs
1.500 ng/ml, P!0.05) of women with TF infertility compared to PCOS. There
was a trend towards higher follicular BPA levels in TF women compared to PCOS
women after BMI stratification. After adjustment for age, BMI and exogenous
FSH administration, follicular BPA levels correlated negatively with number of
oocytes collected during oocyte retrieval in TF (P!0.05) but not in PCOS
women. Nevertheless, follicular BPA levels had no significant effect on fertilized
oocytes fertilized and pregnancy rates in both groups.
Conclusion
The present study showed that there was a trend for higher BPA levels in FF of TF
as compared to PCOS women. In TF women BPA FF levels correlated negatively
with the number of oocytes collected during oocyte retrieval. However, no effect
of FF BPA levels was observed on fertilized oocytes and pregnancy rates in both
groups.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP661
EP662
The relation of liver enzymes and insulin resistance in women with
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Djuro Macut1, Ivana Bozic-Antic1, Konstatinos Tziomalos2, Jelica Bjekic-
Macut3, Dusan Ilic1, Danijela Vojnovic-Milutinovic4, Olivera Stanojlovic5,
Bojana Popovic1, Tamara Bogavac1, Tatjana Isailovic1,
Valentina Elezovic1, Sanja Ognjanovic1 & Dimitrios Panidis2
1Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Clinial Center
of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;2Department of Medicine, University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece;3CHC Bezanijska kosa, Belgrade,
Serbia;4IBISS, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;5Institute of
Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
A link between polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) has been recently demonstrated. The pathogenesis of NAFLD
is multifactorial, but obesity and insulin resistance (IR) appear to be important
contributing factors. The aim of this study was to analyze level of transaminazes
in PCOS women, and its relation to the indices of IR.
Methods
We analyzed 600 women with PCOS diagnosed using ESHRE/ASRM criteria
(age 25.6G5.9 years, BMI 30.6G6.9 kg/m2), and 125 body mass index (BMI)-
matched healthy controls (age 31.4G5.3 years, BMI 29.6G6.8 kg/m2). IR was
evaluated using homeostatic model (HOMA-IR) with the cut-off of 2.5. Using
cut-off, both PCOS and controls were divided into: PCOS-IR (NZ384), PCOS-
nonIR (NZ216), Controls-IR (NZ53) and Controls-nonIR (NZ72). Serum liver
enzymes, glucose, insulin, total testosterone and sex hormone binding globulin
were determined and free androgen index (FAI) was calculated. Differences
between groups were age and BMI adjusted.
Results
The highest AST was found in PCOS-IR and significantly differed in comparison to
PCOS-nonIR (20.75G8.31 vs 17.99G5.04U/L, respectively, P!0.05). There was
no difference in AST level between Controls-IR and Controls-nonIR (18.96G6.66
vs 18.38G5.63U/L, respectively, PO0.05). ALT was highest in PCOS-IR and
significantly differed from PCOS-nonIR (25.36G16.21 vs. 18.59G10.08 U/l,
respectively, P!0.05), while ALT levels were the same in Controls-IR compared to
Controls-nonIR
(24.60G12.97  vs.  19.97G10.94  U/l,  respectively,  PO0.05).
In PCOS HOMA-IR correlated with both AST (rZ0.202, P!0.001) and ALT
(rZ0.315, P!0.001) while in Controls only with ALT (rZ0.254, PZ0.004).
Conclusions
Although our PCOS women had normal values of liver enzymes, they were higher
in comparison to controls. It seems that IR could additionally contribute to the
disturbance of liver enzymes in PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP662
EP663
Pre-pregnancy risk assessment and combined multidisciplinary care
improves pregnancy outcomes in women with Turner’s syndrome
Gayathri Kumarasinghe1, Matilde Calanchini2, Lucy Mackillop3,
Oliver Ormerod1, Nicky Manning4, Elizabeth Orchard1 & Helen Turner2
1Dept of Cardiology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals
NHS Trust, Oxford, UK;2The Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Oxford, UK;3Dept of Obstetrics, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK;4Dept of
Paediatric Cardiology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals
NHS Trust, Oxford, UK.
Aims
Women with Turner’s syndrome (TS) are increasingly undertaking pregnancies,
either via natural conception (mosaic TS) or assisted conception (AC). Increased
TS pregnancies have led to reports suggesting high risk of pregnancy associated
aortic dissection (AOD) 2%, and maternal mortality 2% due to underlying aortic
valve abnormalities and aortopathies. However, the literature is limited to small
case series. We report our practice providing risk-assessment and combined
specialist TS endocrinology, cardiology and obstetrics services, resulting in low
maternal and fetal complications.
Methods
Data were retrospectively analysed for patients with spontaneous pregnancy or
AC  with  multidisciplinary  risk-assessment  and  care  during  pregnancy  and
peurperium, and follow-up in a specialist TS clinic between 2009 and 2016.
Results
Of 87 TS patients, thirteen (15%) had spontaneous pregnancies and six (7%) had
AC  with  three  successful  pregnancies.  Pre-conception  risk-assessment  and
counselling were conducted by a multidisciplinary team comprising TS
endocrinologist, obstetrician and cardiologist with echocardiography G cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging. Five patients had pre-existing cardiovascular disease
(bicuspid aortic valve [nZ5]; dilated aortic root or ascending aorta [nZ4];
moderate aortic stenosis
[nZ1]; hypertension
[nZ3]; surgery for dilated
ascending aorta [nZ1]; and for complex congenital heart disease including
coarctation [nZ1]). During pregnancy, patients underwent regular review by a TS
endocrinologist, cardiologist with echocardiography and obstetrician in a high-risk
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
maternity clinic. Fetal cardiologist assessment occurred at 20 weeks gestation.
Maternal echocardiography was performed post-partum. There were 16 successful
live-births (nZ13 spontaneous pregnancies, nZ3 AC). One patient developed
gestational  hypertension  which  responded  to  medical  therapy.  One  patient
developed mild progression of aortic root dilatation post-partum. There were no
cases of moderate or severe aortic dilatation, AOD, pre-eclampsia, maternal deaths
or fetal cardiac disease.
Conclusions
Pre-pregnancy  risk-assessment  and  close  multidisciplinary  care  by  endo-
crinology,  cardiology  and  obstetrics  services  during  pregnancy  and  the
peurperium ensures low maternal complications and excellent survival in TS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP663
EP664
The first hungarian preimplantational karyomapping In men2a
syndrome - case report
Éva Csajbók1,2, Marianna Csenki2, László Nánássy2, Anita Fazekas2 &
Attila Vereczkey2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrine Unit, University of Szeged,
Szeged, Hungary;2Versys Clinics, Human Reproduction Institute,
Budapest, Hungary.
The case
The multiplex endocrine neoplasia 2A (MEN2A) syndrome is a monogenic
disease caused by mutation of the RET protooncogene leading to medullary
thyroid cancer (MTC), pheochromocytoma and primary hyperparathyroidism.
The specific mutations determine the timing of the preventive thyroidectomy. In
2007, in a 26 year old female patient, after detailed endocrine investigation, total
thyroidectomy with both sided lateral neck lymph node dissection was performed
because of suspicion of medullary thyroid cancer. The final histology proved the
diagnosis. Three years later hypertensive peaks occured, pheochromocytoma was
found and removed by laparoscopic adrenalectomy. The family was screened for
MEN2A. The mutation TGC634TTC(Cys634Phe) of the codon 634 was found in
the patient, in her father and one brother. After spontaneous conception and
normal pregnancy in October 2012 she gave birth to a boy. The son was screened
for MTC with calcitonin with the age of 11 and 13 months (15.6-18 pg/ml) and
was proven to be RET positive. Preventive total thyroidectomy and partial
parathyroidectomy was done with the age of 18 months. The final histology found
no sign of medullary thyroid cancer or primary hyperparathyroidism. As the
patient did not want to have another child affected by the disease, application of
assisted reproductive technologies were recommended. After ovarian stimulation,
4 embryos were biopsied in trophectoderm stage. Karyomapping (preimplanta-
tional genetic screening for chromosomal abormalities and preimplantational
genetic diagnostics for the specific mutation) was performed revealing one
healthy  and  three  MEN2A  affected  embryos,  two  of  them  with  maternal
aneuploidy aswell.
Conclusion
For the monogenic disease affected families, it is important to offer the possibility
of preimplantation genetic diagnosis to exclude the affected embryos to be
transfered. Healthy children don’t require lifelong endocrine follow-up and
operations, and no psychological support.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP664
EP665
PCOS in women with type 1 diabetes mellitus is not related to diabetes
duration or insulin dose
Tina Krokter Kogoj1, Mojca Jensterle Sever1, Katja Gori
ˇar2,
Marjeta Tomažič1, Aleš Skvar
ˇa1, Vesna Sˇ alamun3, Nina Jančar3 &
Andrej Jane
ˇ1
1Department for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases,
University Clinical Center, Ljubljana, Slovenia;2Institute of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia;
3Department for Reproduction, Division of Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
University Clinical Center, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is highly prevalent in women with type 1
diabetes mellitus (T1DM), possibly due to premenarchal exogenous hyperinsulin-
ism (supraphysiological doses and nonphysiologic route of insulin adminis-
tration). Our aim was to determine if PCOS was related to daily or basal insulin
dose or T1DM duration.
Methods
We examined 47 women with T1DM (mean age 36.02 years, G6.03) treated with
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (78.7%) or basal/bolus insulin therapy.
Rotterdam criteria were used to diagnose PCOS. Participants reported medical
history, underwent clinical examination, endocrine testing and ovarian ultrasound
scan.
Results
PCOS was confirmed in 20 women (42.5%). Mean HbA1c in PCOS was 7.36%
(G0.81%), mean T1DM duration was 20 years (G7.16); daily insulin dose (DID)
36.11 IU (G10.02), basal insulin dose (BID) was 17.72 IU (G7.13) in PCOS and
7.22% (G0.83%), 23.17 years (G11.74), 35.25 IU (G13.34), 17.28 IU (G7.15)
in  non-PCOS  group respectively.  Neither  comparison  of  DID  and  BID,
premenarchal onset and T1DM duration nor multivariable logistic regression
revealed statistically significant differences between the groups. No significant
correlation between PCO ovarian morphology, DID and/or BID and/or T1DM
duration was found. Statistically significant correlations in our sample were:
correlation of DID to weight (P!0.001) and BMI (P!0.001), BID to BMI
(PZ0.001), DID to free testosterone concentration (PZ0.001), BID to free
testosterone concentration (PZ0.014) and T1DM duration to BMI (PZ0.022).
Conclusion
We confirmed high prevalence of PCOS in our population with long duration and
good metabolic control of T1DM. However, no difference was observed in DID or
BID and T1DM duration and premenarchal onset of T1DM between PCOS and
non-PCOS  group.  Curiously,  a  correlation  between  DID  and  BID  to  free
testosterone concentration was observed in the study population. Factors other
than exogenous hyperinsulinemia, possibly genetics and epigenetics, might be
important in pathogenesis of PCOS in women with T1DM.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP665
EP666
Polycystic ovary syndrome phenotype does not increase prevalence of
coronary artery disease in postmenopausal women
Preeti Dabadghao, Samir Saini, Aditya Kapoor & Satyendra Tiwari
Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Insitute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India.
Abstract withdrawn.
EP667
Glucose level after standard oral glucose tolerance test as a potential
marker for the development of type 2 diabetes in women with polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Ivana Bozic-Antic1, Jelica Bjekic-Macut2, Dusan Ilic1, Danijela Vojnovic-
Milutinovic3, Bojana Popovic1, Tamara Bogavac1, Tatjana Isailovic1,
Valentina Elezovic1, Sanja Ognjanovic1, Olivera Stanojlovic4,
Svetozar Damjanovic1 & Djuro Macut1
1Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Clinical Center
of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;2CHC Bezanijska kosa, Belgrade, Serbia;
3IBISS, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;4Institute of Physiology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
It has been shown that subjects with normal fasting glucose (NFG) and normal
glucose tolerance (NGT), whose plasma glucose concentration does not return
to their fasting plasma glucose (FPG) level within 2 h following standard oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT), have higher risk of progression into type 2
diabetes (T2D) than NFG/NGT subjects whose glucose returns to FPG level after
OGTT. Although the development of T2D during the life of woman with
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is nowadays assumed to be higher than
previously thought, the exact reason for that is still unknown.
Methods
We evaluated 193 non-obese PCOS women (body mass index, BMI: 22.47G
3.33 kg/m2; age: 24.93G4.59 years) diagnosed using ESHRE/ASRM criteria and
53 healthy non-obese women in control group (BMI: 24.05G3.29 kg/m2; age:
30.21G5.57 years). In follicular phase of menstrual cycle 2-h OGTT with 75 g of
glucose was performed in all subjects. IFG, IGT and T2D were defined according
to International Federation for Diabetes (IFD) criteria. All analysis were adjusted
for BMI and age.
Results
None of the PCOS subjects had T2D and none of the controls had either IFG or
IGT. In PCOS group, IFG was diagnosed in 3/193 (1.6%) and IGT in 6/193
(3.1%). All PCOS women with IFG had NGT, while all PCOS subjects with IGT
had NFG. When only NGT/NFG subjects were analyzed (184 PCOS and 53
Controls), PCOS had higher prevalence of higher postload glucose than FPG in
comparison to Controls (67% vs 50%, respectively PZ0.045).
Conclusion
Higher postload glucose level than fasting plasma glucose level could be a useful
marker of risk for the development of T2D in women with PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP667
EP668
Serum alanine aminotransferase level as an early indicator of metabolic
disturbancies in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Jelica Bjekic-Macut1, Ivana Bozic-Antic2, Konstatinos Tziomalos3,
Dusan Ilic2, Danijela Vojnovic-Milutinovic4, Olivera Stanojlovic5,
Bojana Popovic2, Tamara Bogavac2, Tatjana Isailovic2,
Valentina Elezovic2, Sanja Ognjanovic2, Djuro Macut2 &
Dimitrios Panidis3
1
CHC Bezanijska Kosa, Belgrade, Serbia;2Clinic of Endocrinology,
Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade,
Serbia;3Department of Medicine, University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki,
Greece;4IBISS, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;5Institute of
Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level is used to screen patients for
unsuspected liver disease. The entire histologic spectrum of nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease (NAFLD) can be seen in individuals with normal ALT values.
Accordingly, it has been suggested that by using ALTO19 U/l, early stages of
NAFLD could be detected. As it was established a relation of NAFLD and PCOS,
the aim of our study was to compare metabolic characteristics of women with
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in relation to ALT levels.
Methods
We  evaluated  600  PCOS  women  diagnosed  using  ESHRE/ASRM  criteria,
divided into 2 groups: group A with ALT!19 IU/l (NZ299; BMI 28.64G
5.86 kg/m2; age 25.27G5.77 years) and group B with ALT R19 IU/l (NZ301;
BMI:32.64G7.36 kg/m2; age 25.93G6.12 years), and 53 healthy non-obese
women (Controls: 24.05G3.29 kg/m2; 30.21G5.57 years). Serum liver enzymes,
glucose, insulin, lipids, total testosterone and sex hormone binding globulin were
determined. Insulin resistance was evaluated by homeostatic model (HOMA-IR).
All analysis were BMI adjusted.
Results
In all examined subjects, liver enzymes were in the reference range. Group B had
higher values of aspartate-aminotransferase (AST) (22.75G8.85 vs 16.73G3.60,
P!0.001),  gamma-glutamil-transferase
(20.03G10.93
vs
13.40G5.80,
PZ0.009), alkaline phosphatase (78.52G21.36 vs 68.28G20.26, P!0.001),
insulin (18.46G10.24 vs 13.48G8.83, P!0.001), HOMA-IR (4.52G2.78 vs
3.21G2.26, P!0.001), total cholesterol (5.15G1.02 vs 4.70G0.94, P!0.001),
LDL (3.33G0.94 vs 2.97G0.82, P!0.001) and triglycerides (1.24G0.60 vs
0.97G0.40, P!0.001). There were no difference in fasting glucose, HDL,
testosterone and SHBG.
Conclusion
Serum ALT levels greater than 19 IU/l could be an early indicator of metabolic
disturbances in women with PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP668
EP669
The association between polycystic ovary syndrome and lipid
accumalation product index
Halime Kılı
¸1, Kenan 
¸ adırcı2, S¸ enay Durmaz3, Mustafa Utlu2,
Hakan Sevimli2 & Ay¸e 
¸ arlıo
˘ lu2
1Nene Hatun Maternity Hospıtal, Erzurum, Erzurum, Turkey;2Department
of İnternal Medicine, Erzurum Training and Research Hospital, Erzurum,
Turkey;3Department of İnternal Medicine, Kırıkkale University, Erzurum,
Turkey.
Aim
The lipid accumulation product (LAP) index which is associated with abnormal
glucose regulation can  be easily calculated. Women with polycystic ovary
syndrome have more than one risk factor for the development of cardiovascular
diseases such as glucose intolerance, insulin resistance and abdominal lipoidosis.
In this study, we intend the evaluation of LAP index in women with PCOS.
Method
This study included 35 women patients with PCOS (mean age 22.4G5.2 year)
and  33  healthy  normoovulatory  women  in  control  group  who  had  similar
age (mean age 21.0G3.1 year). The plasma lipid profile, glucose and insulin
levels of the patients were detected after 12 h fasting and waist circumference
was measured. The lipid accumulation product index was calculated with the
formula previously defined as (waist circumference (cm) - 58) ! triglycerides
(mmol/l). HOMA IR glucose was calculated with the formula of (mmol/l)!
insulin (mU/ml)/22.5.
Findigs
In this study, the mean of LAP index in the patients and the control group were
respectively
(38.2G42.6  and  12.0G13.1,  PZ0.000),  TG  (115.9G67.9  etc.
82.8G46.3 mg/dl, PZ0.004), HOMA-IR (3.5G2.4 and 2.2G1.3 PZ0.01), total
cholesterol (178.2G35.4 and160.0G27.7 mg/dl PZ0.02), insulin (16.1G10.1
and 11.0G6.3 mU/ml PZ0.02), waist circumference (84.3G15.8 and 69.2G
8.05 cm, PZ0.000), LDL (107.1G31.1 and 88.7G27.1 mg/dl PZ0.01).
There was a positive correlation between LAP index and bodyweight (rZ0.79
PZ0.000),  waist  circumference
(rZ0.81  PZ0000)  HOMA  score  (rZ0.35
PZ0.008), insulin (rZ0.37 PZ0.005), TG (rZ0.79 PZ0.000) and LDL levels
(rZ0.32 PZ0.008).
A positive correlation was detected between BMI and LAP index (rZ0.73
PZ0.000), HOMA-IR (rZ0.48 PZ0.000), fasting insulin levels
(rZ0.46
PZ0.000).
Results
High LAP index may help for the evaluation of metabolic risk in women with
PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP669
EP670
Androgen distribution in different phenotypes of women with polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Dusan Ilic1, Ivana Bozic-Antic1, Jelica Bjekic-Macut2, Danijela Vojnovic-
Milutinovic3, Tamara Bogavac1, Bojana Popovic1, Tatjana Isailovic1,
Valentina Elezovic1, Sanja Ognjanovic1, Olivera Stanojlovic4,
Svetozar Damjanovic1 & Djuro Macut1
1Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Clinial Center
of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;2CHC Bezanijska kosa, Belgrade, Serbia;
3IBISS, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;4Institute of Physiology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) phenotypes A and B are considered to be
more hyperandrogenic in comparison to phenotypes C and D that are considered
to be mostly reproductive. The aim of this study was to analyze distribution of
androgens in different phenotypes in our PCOS population.
Methods
We evaluated 365 PCOS women (PCOS:25.05G6.24 kg/m2; 25.48G5.21 years)
diagnosed using ESHRE/ASRM criteria and 125 healthy women (Controls:
25.41G5.16
kg/m2;
30.35G5.62  years).  PCOS  group  was  divided  into
4
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
phenotypes: A [anovulation (ANOV), hyperandrogenism (HA), polycystic ovary
morphology (PCOM)], B (ANOV, HA), C (HA, PCOM) and D (ANOV, PCOM).
In  follicular  phase  of  menstrual  cycle  total  testosterone
(TT),  SHBG,
androstenedione and DHEAS and free androgen index (FAI) were determined
in all subjects. All analyses were BMI and age adjusted.
Results
In comparison to Controls, phenotypes A, B and C had higher levels of TT, FAI,
and androstenedione; DHEAS was higher in A and C, while SHBG lower in all
phenotypes. Only 4% of phenotypes A, B and C had elevated only TT, which was
significantly different in comparison to both D and Controls. Prevalence of
elevated only DHEAS or androstenedione was the same in all phenotypes. The
most common was presence of concomitantly high TT and androstenedione: A
23%, B 24%, C 15% while 0% in both D and Controls (P!0.05). A and C had
higher prevalence of concomitantly high both TT and DHEAS (13% and 10%,
respectively) in comparison to Controls (0%) and phenotype D (0%), (P!0.05).
The prevalence of concomitantly elevated both androstenedione and DHEAS was
the same in all groups.
Conclusion
In  our  PCOS  population  the  most  common  hyperandrogenemia  pattern  is
concomitant elevation of both TT and androstenedione. Low SHBG is a common
feature in all PCOS phenotypes including phenotype D.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP670
EP671
Effect of methomyl on the biochemical and reproductive parameters in
pregnancy rats: the protective role of Pistacia Lentiscus oil
Rachid Mosbah1,2, Nadia Mokrani1, Imane Mosbahi1, Sara Rouabhi1 &
Alberto Mantovani3
1Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Boumerdes,
Boumerdes, Algeria;2Laboratory of Eco-Biology ENS-Kouba- Algiers,
Algiers, Algeria;3Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
Methomyl (MET) is a carbamate insecticide used worldwide to protect a wide
variety of crops from insect nuisances. Besides this beneficial role, it is classified
as highly toxic compound for humans and animals by the EPA. Pistacia Lentiscus
(PL) is a shrub that grows in the Mediterranean region; plant parts and oil have a
long history in folk medicine in healing several diseases by their antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory, antimicrobial, antifungal, antiatherogenic and anticancer proper-
ties. Hence, this study was undertaken to assess the effect of MET on biochemical,
histological and reproductive parameters as well as the possible protective role of
Pistacia Lentiscus oil (PLO) against MET-induced toxicity in pregnant female
rats.
Thirty two pregnant female rats were randomly divided into four equal groups
including control, MET group (10 mg/kg/bw), PLO group (0.5 ml/kg/bw) and
METC PLO group, MET and PLO were administered by oral route. At the
eighteenth day of gestation (GD18), the blood samples were taken from retro-
orbital sinus to evaluate the biochemical parameters and progesterone level. Then
after the parturition, the different reproductive parameters were measured and
the  ovary  and  adrenal  glands  were  removed, weighed,  fixed  and  used  for
histopathological examination.
The results show that MET increased significantly the weight of liver and adrenal
gland, the level of cholesterol, glucose, creatinin, urea, ASAT and ALAT,
meanwhile the level of total protein was reduced. Likewise, MET induced
reproductive toxicity pronounced by a decline in the level of progesterone, an
alteration in the reproductive index and an increase in the number of ovary atretic
follicles and degenerative corpus luteum. The supplementation of the PLO with
MET reverses  partially  and/or  completely  all adverse  effects  noted on the
biochemical and reproductive parameters as well as on the histopathological
changes by their antioxidant activities. We recommended the use of PLO by oral
and/or dermal application as protective agent against several diseases related to
reproduction dysfunction.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP671
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP672
The association between increased circulating irisin levels and
inflammatory markers in polycystic ovary syndrome
Nurdan Yildiz1, Mehmet Calan2, Minegul Cobanoglu1, Hatice İsik Sengul1,
Gokcen Unal Kocabas2 & Serkan Guclu1
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (Izmir PCOS Research Group),
Sifa University School of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey;2Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine
(Izmir PCOS Research Group), Bozyaka Training and Research Hospital,
Izmir, Turkey.
Purpose
Irisin is a secreted protein implicated in the regulation of insulin sensitivity and
energy metabolism. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an inflammatory-based
metabolic  disease  associated  with  insulin  resistance,  dyslipidemia,  glucose
metabolism dysfunction and obesity. There is also some evidence of a link
between irisin and inflammation. Our aim of the study to ascertain whether the
association of circulating irisin levels with inflammatory markers in PCOS.
Materials and Methods
A total of 128 women with PCOS and 128 age- and body mass index-matched
female controls without PCOS were recruited for this cross-sectional study.
Circulating irisin, UCP1, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) and interleukin-6
(IL-6) levels were measured using ELISA; metabolic and hormonal parameters
were also determined.
Results
Circulating irisin levels were higher in women with PCOS compared with
controls (203.49G79.11 vs 169.82G66.05 ng/ml, P!0.001), whereas UCP1
levels were lower (31.41G12.57 vs. 38.34G15.29 pg/ml, P!0.001). The serum
levels of inflammatory markers IL-6, TNF-a and hs-CRP were found to be
significantly  elevated  in  women  with  PCOS.  Irisin  levels  were  negatively
correlated with UCP1 levels and positively correlated with inflammatory markers
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), TNF-a, IL-6 and free-testosterone
levels. Multiple linear regression analysis revealed that free-testosterone, UCP1,
hs-CRP, TNF-a and IL-6 independently predicted irisin levels.
Conclusions
Increased irisin levels were associated with decreased UCP1 levels and elevated
free-testosterone and inflammatory markers in PCOS patients, suggesting a
possible connection between the irisin signaling pathway and inflammation in
PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP672
EP673
Improvement of beta-cell function with DPP-4 inhibitor alogliptin vs
alogliptin in combination with pioglitazone as a potential treatment
target in metformin treated PCOS with persistent high metabolic risk:
randomized pilot study
Mojca Jensterle1, Katja Goricar2 & Andrej Janez1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases,
University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia;2Institute of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
Introduction
High conversion rates to impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and diabetes in PCOS
indicate that current treatment strategy with lifestyle modification and metformin is
insufficient. Preservation of b-cell function remains unaddressed although it is
declined by 80% long before IGT is identified. Alogliptin is selective dipeptidyl
peptidase-4
inhibitor  improving insulin  sensitivity
(IS) and  b-cell function.
Pioglitazone predominantly improves insulin resistance (IR) and when given early
also preserve b-cell function. The aim of the study was to evaluate whether the
addition of alogliptin alone or in combination with pioglitazone improves b-cell
function along with IR as measured by static and dynamic glucose homeostasis
models in metformin treated PCOS with persistent high metabolic risk.
Design
In 12-week randomized study, alogliptin (ALO) 25 mg QD (nZ15) or alogliptin
25 mg QD and pioglitazone (PIO) 30 mg QD (nZ15) was added to metformin
(MET) 1000 mg BID in 30 PCOS women (aged 34.4G6.5 years, BMI 39.0G4.9
kg/m2, HOMA-IR 4.82G2.52, mean G S.D.). Fasting and acute glucose and
insulin response to 2-h meal tolerance test was determined at baseline and study
end. The ability of b-cell function to adapt insulin secretion to ambient IS was
assessed by adaptation index (AI).
Results
14 patients on MET-ALO and 14 on MET-ALO-PIO completed the study.
MET-ALO and MET-ALO-PIO resulted in significant decrease of HOMA-IR (for
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
K1.56G2.29  (PZ0.039)  vs  K2.86G3.34  (PZ0.001)  and  increase  in  IS
after meal ingestion (oral glucose IS) for 31.37G97.52 ml minK1  mK2  (PZ
0.007) vs 39.0G58.11 (PZ0.039), respectively. AI across the entire group was
significantly improved from
329.60G200.63 to 442.51G303.87 (PZ0.048).
Triple combination also led to significant improvement of androgen and lipid
profiles.
Conclusion
Alogliptin alone and in particular in combination with pioglitazone improved
meal related b-cell function along with IS and IR when added to metformin
resistant PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP673
EP674
Pregnancy by Treatment for Graves Disease in a Patient with Primary
Ovarian Failure
Berna Evranos1, Sefika Burcak Polat2, Husniye Baser1, Nagihan Bestepe2 &
Bekir Cakir2
1Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Yildirim Beyazit University, Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a disorder associated with female infertility,
and it affects approximately 1% of women under the age of 40 year. It is
considered  a  multifactorial,  heterogeneous  condition,  for  which  the  exact
underlying  cause  remains  unclear.  Associations  with  autoimmune  diseases,
environmental  factors  and  genetic  causes  have  been  described.  Herein  we
presented a case with POF who regained fertility after the treatment of Graves
disease.
Case
A 29-year-old nulligravida woman with amenorrhea for six years was referred to
our clinic for the treatment of hyperthyroidism. She had been followed by
gynecology clinics with the diagnosis of POF and received hormone replacement
therapy  before  application  to  our  clinic.  Her  follicle  stimulating  hormone,
luteinizing hormone, estradiol checked in her last visit before the referral were;
107.3 mIU/ml, 63.5 mIU/ml and 10.41 pg/ml, respectively. Her karyotype was 46,
XX. New blood test revealed a thyroid stimulating hormone of 0.017 uIU/ml
(normal,
2.0-4.4),  free  thyroxin  of
4.29
ng/dL
(normal,
0.9-1.7),  free
triiodothyronine of
13.66
pg/ml (normal,
0.27-4.2) and thyroid stimulating
antibody level of
44.49 u/l
(normal, 0-14). On ultrasound, the thyroid was
diffusely enlarged with coarse heterogeneous echogenity. A diagnosis of Graves’s
disease was made and methimazole was started 15 mg once daily. The dosage was
adjusted accordingly and she had used methimazole for 13 months and was
euthyroid when the pregnancy was determined.
Conclusion
Numerous case reports and certain observational and interventional studies have
reported spontaneous pregnancies and ovulation in POF patients. Some authors
suggested the possible effects of immuno-modulating therapy on the resumption
of ovarian function and fertility in a selected group of POF patients. Anti- thyroid
drugs  may  have  clinically  important  immunosuppressive  effects.  To  our
knowledge, this is the first case in the literature who had POF and Graves
disease and got pregnant upon anti-thyroid drug treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP674
EP675
Baseline and metoclopramide induced plasma prolactin level in lean
PCOS women according to their FAI phenotype
Sandra Mrozinska1, Katarzyna Gorztyla2, Agnieszka Przywara3,
Justyna Guzik4, Marta Kialka5 & Tomasz Milewicz5
1Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University, Medical
College, Cracow, Poland;2Department of Neurology, Medical Center,
Lancut, Poland;3Department of Oncology, Provincial Specialistic Hospital,
Rybnik, Poland;4St. Rafal’s Hospital, Cracow, Poland;5Department of
Gynecological Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University, Medical College,
Cracow, Poland.
Aim
Aim of our study was to compare: the baseline and metoclopramide induced
prolactin plasma level between PCOS women with FAI !5 phenotype (group A)
(FAI, total testosterone divided by sex hormone biding globulin, whole multiply
by 100) and PCOS women with FAIO5 phenotype (group B).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Patients and methods
The study population consisted of 354 lean women with PCOS. In all the patients
the prolactin level at 02:00 h, 08:00 h and during the metoclopramide oral test,
were assessed. The free androgen index was calculated to each woman. The
population was dived into two group according to the FAI phenotype. The group
A contains 250 women with PCOS and FAIO5, the group B contains 104 women
with PCOS and FAI!5. The groups did not differ in age (group A: 24.3G5.3
years vs. group B 25.4G5.7 years and BMI (group A: 21.3G2.1 kg/m2 vs. group
B: 20.9G2.1 kg/m2 at baseline.
Results
The prolactin level was statistically significant higher (P!0.0001) in group B at
02:00 h (55.2 uIU/ml vs. 98.7 uIU/ml), at 08:00 h (159.8 uIU/ml vs. 390.2
uIU/ml), at 60-minute of metoclopramide test (690.41 uIU/ml vs. 1853.5 uIU/ml)
and at 120-minute of metoclopramide test (606.4 uIU/ml vs. 1328.2 uIU/ml). The
prolactin ratio at 120-minute of metoclopramide test to the baseline level was also
higher in the group B (11.1G6.5 vs. 14.7G10.2; P!0.001).
Conclusion
The results may suggest that prolactin levels are lower in women with PCOS and
FAIO5 than in women with PCOS and FAI!5. The prolactin level in PCOS
women may be connected with the level of androgenicity in PCOS women.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP675
EP676
Determinants of the reliable contraceptive use: a nationwide
cross-sectional survey in Hungary
Melinda Vanya1,2, Ivan Devosa1,2, Norbert Pasztor3 & Zoltan Kozinszky4
1Teacher Training Faculty, College of Kecskemét, Kecskemét, Hungary,
Kecskemét, Hungary;2Health Research and Health Promotion Research
Group, College of Kecskemét, Kecskemét, Hungary;3Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary,
4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaeco, Karlskrona, Sweden.
Objective
The purpose of this study was to investigate the contraceptive practice and
sociodemographic determinants of employment of contraceptive methods among
sexually active women.
Design and methods
A randomly selected representative sample of 4542 women aged 15-49 years
from the Hungarian population participated in a prospective web-based and postal
questionnaire survey. Women completed self-report questionnaires on socio-
demographic characteristics, contraceptive practice and sexual activity between
June and July 2015. Factors associated with the use of reliable contraceptives
were studied. Multiple logistic regression analysis was applied to evaluate the
factors influencing the contraceptive practice of women in reproductive age.
Informed consent was obtained by email or written form via post.
Results
The mean age of the women was 29.4 years (G8), and 77% reported urban residents.
The rate of use of reliable methods (hormonal contraceptives, intrauterine devices
or sterilization) was 43%, while no method was used by 4.7% of the participants.
They had stable sexual partnership (91.1%) predominantly and almost one tenth
claimed that they had only occasional partner (8.9%).
Logistic regression indicated that high income was favourable for the choice of
modern contraceptive methods (adjusted odds ratio (AOR): 1.1), like the increased
sexual frequency (AOR:1.1). The number of lifetime partners (AOR:0.99) and
sexarche (AOR:0.94) was correlated inversely with the use of reliable contra-
ceptives. Previous abortion (AOR:1.4) or delivery (AOR:1.58) was correlated
significantly with an increased chance of reliable method use. Women with future
child wish are significantly less prone to the use of reliable methods (AOR:0.70).
Conclusion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first large scale representative report
describing the contraceptive preferences in Hungary as a result of complex
interplay between sociodemographic and sexual characteristics.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP676
EP677
The influence of the body fat distribution on the selected biochemical
parameters in a group of women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome -
preliminary report
Anna Bronczyk-Puzon, Justyna Nowak, Karolina Kulik-Kupka,
Aneta Koszowska & Barbara Zubelewicz-Szkodzinska
Department of Nutrition Related Prevention; School of Public Health in
Bytom, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Bytom, Silesia, Poland.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome is usually accompanied by metabolic changes such as
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism disorders and obesity.
Aim
The aim of the study is to determine the impact of the deployment of body fat on
selected biochemical parameters in women with Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome.
Materials and methods
The study included a group of 45 women with diagnosed Polycystic Ovarian
Syndrome  based  on  the  2003  Rotterdam  criteria.  In  order  to  evaluate  the
distribution of body fat, the WHR (Waist-Hip Ratio) index was used. For the
diagnosis of abdominal obesity we adopted the values R0.85 and !0.85 for
gluteal-femoral obesity. A P value of !0.05 was considered to be significant.
Results
The group of women aged 18-40 years (16.4G5.6) entered the study. Significant
differences  were  found  between  the  group  of  women  with  gluteal-femoral
obesity and the group of women with abdominal obesity in terms of average
values of: HDL cholesterol (mg/dl) (71.08G14.84 vs. 48.95G8.48; P!0.0001),
TG  (mg/dl)  (81.80G34.65
vs.
125.58G63.23;  PZ0.0054),  HOMA  index
(1.97G1,64 vs. 3.07G1.18; PZ0.0186), SHGB  (nmol/l) (25.69G31,53 vs.
32.44G19.01; PZ0.0008), free testosterone (pg/ml) (5.74G4.19 vs. 11.81G
6.37; PZ0.0004), and FAI index (4.02G3.31 vs. 8.16G4.00; PZ0.0017).
Conclusion
Evaluation of body fat distribution seems to be useful in determining the risk of
carbohydrate metabolism and lipid metabolism disorders as well as hyperan-
drogenemia in with Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP677
EP678
The influence of insulin resistance on selected anthropometric and
biochemical parameters in women with Polycystic Ovary
Syndrome- preliminary report
Anna Bronczyk-Puzon, Karolina Kulik-Kupka, Justyna Nowak,
Aneta Koszowska & Barbara Zubelewicz-Szkodzinska
Department of Nutrition Related Prevention, School of Public Health in
Bytom, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Bytom, Silesia, Poland.
Introduction
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome is the most common recognized endocrinopathy in
women. The syndrome is often accompanied by obesity and insulin resistance.
Aim
The  aim  of  the  study  was  to  assess  the  differences  between  the  selected
anthropometric and biochemical parameters in a group of women with insulin
resistance and without insulin resistance.
Materials and methods
The study included a group of 45 women diagnosed with Polycystic Ovary
Syndrome based on of the 2003 Rotterdam criteria. Insulin resistance was assess
with HOMA-IR index. In accordance with the guidelines of the European Group
for the Study of Insulin Resistance, we adopted HOMA-IR !2 as the valid
values. Body composition was measured with TANITA BC-420 Analyzer. We
assumed a significance level aZ0.05.
Results
Insulin resistance has been recognized in 57.1% of women. Significant differences
were found between the group of women with insulin resistance (average value of
HOMA-IRZ3.37G1.44) and the group of women without insulin resistance
(average value of HOMA-IRZ1.26G0.44) in terms of average values of: body
mass (kg) (83.90G17.06 vs 64.38G14.66; PZ0.0004), BMI (kg/m2) (30.62G
6.37 vs 24.20G5.57; PZ0.0015), body fat (%) (39.41G8.15 vs 29.64G8.29;
PZ0.005), visceral fat (6.63G3.21 vs 3.33G2.66; PZ0.0011), HDL cholesterol
(mg/dl) (54.96G13.35 vs 66.72G17.56; PZ0.0193), SHGB (nmol/l) (36.64G
21.09 vs 71.28G33.48; PZ0.0008), insulin (uU/ml) (14.78G6.06 vs 6.70G2,68;
P!0.0001) and FAI index (7.53G4.19 vs 3.43G2.85; PZ0.0028).
Conclusion
In the group of insulin resistant patients, the percentage of body fat and visceral
fat were higher. Insulin resistance was also associated with differences in the
studied biochemical parameters.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP678
EP679
Evaluation of serum osteoprotegerin and soluble receptor activator of
nuclear factor kB ligand in obese and non-obese patients with polycystic
ovary syndrome
Esra Tutal1, Muyesser Sayki Arslan1, Melia Karakose1, Taner Demirci1,
Erman Cakal1, Mustafa Ozbek1, Gonul Erden2 & Tuncay Delibasi2
1Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit Teaching and Research Hospital, Ankara,
Turkey;2Kastamonu University school of Medicine, Kastamonu, Turkey.
Introduction
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrinopathy associated with
increased  cardiovascular  risk  in  reproductive  aged  women.  Circulating
osteoprotegerin (OPG) and soluble receptor activator of nuclear factor kB ligand
(sRANKL) are associated with subclinical atherosclerosis. Our aim is to evalutate
serum OPG and sRANKL levels and their relations with cardiovascular and
metabolic markers in paients with obese and non-obese PCOS.
Methods
Overall 25 patients with PCOS (14 obese, 11 non-obese, group 1 and group 2,
respectively) and 27 age matched controls (group 3) recruited to the study.
Metabolic and hormonal profiles, carotid artery intima-media thickness (CIMT),
serum OPG and sRANKL levels were assessed.
Results
Mean OPG and sRANKL levels were similar between three groups (PO0.05).
Serum HDL levels were similar in group 1 and 2, but significantly different in
group 2 and 3, group 1 and 3 (PZ0.4, PZ0.04, PZ0.001 respectively). Serum
total testosteron levels were similar in group
1 and 2, group 1 and 3 but
significantly different in group 2 and 3 (PZ0.11, PZ0.31, PZ0.02 respectively).
Homeostasis model assesment-insulin resistance was similar in group 2 and
3,whereas different in group 1 and 3, group 1 and 2 (PZ0.7, PZ0.001, PZ0.001
respectively). hsCRP levels were significantly higher in group 1 than in group 2
(PZ0.04).  However,  CIMT  measurements were  similar  in  three  groups.
Furthermore, no significant correlation between OPG, sRANKL and cardiovas-
cular and metabolic parameters.
Conclusion
PCOS is associated with increased cardiovascular risk particularly in obese
patients. Based on the results of this study, OPG and sRANKL had not taken a
critical role on the development of preclinical atherosclerosis in PCOS. Further
prospective studies are needed in large number of patients on this issue.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP679
EP680
Validation of the Estradiol III assay (Roche) in the ovulatory phase
Anke Laskewitz1, Irene Homminga2, Lucie Wagenmakers3 &
Anneke Muller Kobold3
1Laboratory of Clinical chemistry and Hematology, Certe, Leeuwarden,
The Netherlands;2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Section
Reproductive Medicine, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands;3Department of Laboratory
Medicine, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.
Introduction
Estradiol  is  an  important  parameter  in  the  evaluation  of  female  fertility.
Moreover,  the  measurement  estradiol  is  essential  in  determining  the  right
moment for oocyte retrieval in modified natural cycle IVF (MNC-IVF). Estradiol
is measured by an immunochemical method and a change between immunoassays
usually comes with a change in reference values due to differences in antibodies
used and the lack of harmonization. In our hospital we changed in 2014 from the
AutoDELFIA assay  (AD)  (PerkinELmer) to the  Roche method because  of
continuity. Unfortunately, within a year after the introduction of the Estradiol II
assay (E2II) (Roche) the manufacturer introduced of the Estradiol III assay (E2III),
leading to another change in reference values which is disturbing continuity in
patient care.
Methods
Estradiol levels related to follicle size from patients followed in the (MNC-IVF)
in
2013
(using  AD)  were  compared  with  levels  from  patients  from
2015
(using E2II) by status research. E2III was compared to E2II according to the CLSI
EP9 and EP5 protocols. Since the given reference levels between the two assays
varied more than the two assays differentiated from each other, especially in the
ovulatory phase, the E2III  assay was evaluated in 23 patients followed in the
MNC-IVF.
Results
The E2II assay results in w25% higher estradiol levels compared to AD assay. At
follicle size 18 mm average estradiol levels were 0,87 nmol/l (E2II) vs. 1,06
nmol/l (AD). Passing-Bablok regression from E2II vs. E2III was E2IIIZ0.02C
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
0.93!E2II  over the whole range. In the range used in MNC-IVF patients the
comparison was E2IIIZ0.02C0.85!E2II.
Conclusion
The E2III resulted in 15% lower values compared to the E2II in patients in MNC-
IVF, but are more comparable to the formerly used AD. However, the median
reference value for the ovulatory phase set by the manufacturer was 44% lower,
therefore, new reference values should be set.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP680
EP681
The influence of hormonal disorders on quality of life of women
with acne
Liudmyla Naumova, Lev Prystupiuk, Maksym Prystupiuk,
Marianna Naumova & Oleksandr Prystupiuk
Bogomolets National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Introduction
About 80% of people had acne of some form. This dermatosis manifests at age
12-14, when there is a physiological increase in the level of hormones, and in
most cases it regresses at 18-22. However today, the number of women with acne
at age 25 and older has significantly increased.
Methodology
Conducted was prospective observational study involving 126 women aged 19 to
37 years with inflammatory form of acne of different severity. All of the women
were studied for blood hormonal level in order to detect the syndrome of
hyperandrogenism. Quality of Life Cardiff Acne Disability Index (CADI) was
used in order to assess the quality of life of patients.
Results
Among the examined 126 women, condition of acne was mild in 42% of cases,
moderate  in
51%,  and  severe  in  7%.  According  to  the  level  of  hormone
concentrations in blood, syndrome of hyperandrogenism was determined in 109
of studied females. Adrenal genesis of hyperandrogenism was established in
44.9% of women, mixed genesis - in 34.9%, and ovarian genesis - in 20.2%.
Among the women of this research, the mean score on the CADI responses was
7.8, and 84.1% of them had the CADI score more than 6, indicating a marked
impact on quality of life. The mean score of CADI in women with adrenal type of
hyperandrogenism was 6.2, with ovarian type - 7.3, and with mixed type - 9.8.
Conclusion
It was found out that 86.5% of adult women with acne had different hormonal
disorders that lead to development of acne. It was also found out that the quality of
life of women with acne is influenced not only by the severity of the clinical
manifestation and localization of skin rashes, but an important role is played by
the genesis of hyperandrogenism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP681
EP682
Polycystic ovary syndrome (Pcos) in female-to-male (Ftm) transsexual
persons
Cecilia Calvar1, Mirta Fernández1, Yanina Duran1, Gustavo Perez Ballester2
& Samanta Landini2
1Endocrine Unit, Hospital J. A. Fernández, Buenos Aires, Argentina;
2Ultrasound Unit, Hospital J. A. Fernandez, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
This study was conducted to evaluate the frequency of PCOS in a group of FTM
transsexual persons and its relationship between clinical, hormonal and metabolic
characteristics.
Subjects and Methods
We studied 21 FTM cases, aged 17-37 years, BMI 24.6G5.2. No patient reported
previous hormonal treatment or sex re-assignment surgery. PCOS was diagnosed
according to the Rotterdam ESHRE/ASRM-sponsored PCOS Consensus Work-
shop Group, 2004. World Health Organization’s criteria for metabolic syndrome
(MBS) was used. Insulin resistance was determined using the homeostasis model
assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR).
Results
Twelve out of 21 FTM trans participants (57.1%) were diagnosed as PCOS. None
of the PCOS patients had MBS. No significant differences in BMI nor plasmatic
levels  of  free  and  total  testosterone,  LH,  FSH,  estradiol,  cholesterol  and
triglycerides were found between PCOS and no PCOS trans patients. PCOS
trans patients had higher plasmatic insulin levels and HOMA-IR compared to
no-PCOS FTMs (8.6G3.5 vs. 4.5G1.6; P!0.005 and 2G0.9 vs. 0.9G0.4;
P!0.05 respectively).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
In our study we found more than half of FTM individuals with PCOS, which was
associated with elevated levels of plasmatic insulin and HOMA-IR. Our data
suggest that transsexual men should be screened for PCOS and parameters of
insulin resistance, as PCOS and cross sex androgen treatment have been reported
as predisposing factors for the development of diabetes. A larger study is ongoing
in order to confirm these preliminary results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP682
EP683
Increased level of serum irisin concentration and its regulation by
hyperinsulinemia in women with polycystic ovary syndrome
Agnieszka Adamska1, Monika Karczewska-Kupczewska2,3,
Adamska Lebkowska1, Robert Milewski4, Maria Gorska1,
Elzbieta Otziomek3, Agnieszka Nikolajuk2,3, Slawomir Wolczynski5,
Marek Straczkowski2,3 & Irina Kowalska1
1Department of the Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine,
Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland;2Department of
Metabolic Diseases, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland;
3Department of Prophylaxis of Metabolic Diseases, Institute of Animal
Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Olsztyn,
Poland;4Department of Statistics and Medical Informatics, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland;5Department of Reproduction
and Gynecological Endocrinology, Medical University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland.
Background
Irisin is an adipokine/myokine which could be connected with insulin sensitivity.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is characterized by oligo- or anovulation,
polycystic ovary, hyperandrogenism and insulin resistance.
Objective
The aim of the present study was to determine the relationship between serum
irisin concentration and insulin sensitivity (Mffm) as well as the effect of insulin
infusion on circulating irisin levels in PCOS women as compared with healthy
controls.
Subjects and methods
Seventy seven women were enrolled in the study - 57 with PCOS and 20 healthy
controls matched for BMI and age. Hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamps were
performed in all of the study participants. The serum concentrations of irisin at
baseline and after the clamp, as well as changes of serum irisin concentration in
response to insulin supplied during the clamp (D irisin), were estimated.
Results
The  mean  serum  concentrations  of  irisin  achieved  at  baseline  and  after
hyperinsulinemia were higher in PCOS women in comparison to the control
group (PZ0.01; PZ0.006, respectively). Insulin infusion resulted in a decrease
of serum irisin concentration only in the PCOS group (PZ0.007). In the control
group, D irisin positively correlated with Mffm (rZ0.56, PZ0.009). In the entire
group, multiple regression analysis showed that D irisin (bZ0.70, PZ0.0002),
FFAs  60’  during  the  clamp  study  (bZK0.22,  PZ0.01),  SHBG  (bZ0.54,
P!0.0001)  and  the  interaction  between  D  irisin  and  PCOS
(bZK0.67,
PZ0.0004) were significantly associated with Mffm.
Conclusion
An increase in serum irisin concentration at baseline and an inappropriate change
in response to insulin infusion might be secondary to insulin resistant conditions
in PCOS women.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP683
EP684
Usefulness of dynamic Tsh evaluation for diagnosis of subclinical
hypothyroidism in luteal deficiency
Antonio Mancini1, Elena Giacchi2, Aurora Saporosi2, Giulio Olivieri1,
Chantal Di Segni1, Riccardo Marana2 & Alfredo Pontecorvi1
1Operative Unit of Endocrinology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart,
Rome, Italy;2Center for Study and Research on Natural Fertility Regulation,
Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
Introduction
It is known that thyroid disorders can influence menstrual cycle, but subclinical
hypothyroidism (SH), as cause of ovulation disorders and luteal deficiency (LD)
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
in particular,is underestimated. Monitoring women’s cycles, according to the
Billings Ovulation Method (BOM), can allow a precise timing for hormonal
evaluation and diagnose LD. Usually, a basal TSH value of 2.5 mg/ml is
considered as cut-off for a good luteal function, but alone cannot identify all cases
of SH. In order to verify the sensitivity of TSH dynamics, we have performed
TRH test (200 mg iv) in patients with LD, stratifying women according to
different ranges of basal TSH values.
Methods
We enrolled 65 women, 20-45 ys, consulting our Centre aimed to learn the BOM
for achieving or spacing pregnancy. 40 exhibited an history of infertility. LD was
diagnosed  by  a  shortened  post-Peak  phase  length
(!11  days)  and/or  low
progesterone (P) levels on the 6th or 7th days after the “mucus peak”. SH was
diagnosed with TSH peak O15 mcU/ml after TRH administration (normal basal
TSH range: 0.4-3.2 mg/ml, by ECLIA). RESULTS: According to basal TSH
levels, patients were divided in 3 groups: group A (nZ17, 0.8-1.4 mg/ml), group
B (nZ20, 1.5-2.4), group C (nZ28, 2.5-6.5). An increased TSH response was
observed in 3/17 patients of group A, 14/20 of group B, 27/28 patients of group C.
In the overall group, the evidence of thyroid autoantibodies was
23% and
therefore we escluded auto-immune mechanism as cause of ovarian dysfunction.
Mean progesterone levels were in the low-normal range in all groups (meanG
S.E.M: 6.8G1.7 in group A, 10.5G2.3 in group B, 8.5G0.1 in group C).
Conclusion
These data suggest that SH has an important impact on luteal function; BOM can
be effective for screening these situations and give rise a useful tool in diagnostic
and therapeutic options in subfertile couples. Dynamic TSH evaluation can allow
to diagnose SH,even in presence of normal TSH basal levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP684
EP685
Subclinical hypothyroidism and polycystic ovary syndrome
Zelija Velija-Asimi, Azra Burekovic & Amela Dizdarevic-Bostandzic
University Clinical Center of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Introduction
The  correlation  of  subclinical  hypothyroidism
(SH)  and  polycystic  ovary
syndrome (PCOS) is a still insufficiently explored entity. It is known that the
patients with PCOS are at the greatest risk of infertility as well as cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality. The aim of this study was to determine the existence of
correlation between SH and PCOS. We also aimed to investigate the impact of SH
on the metabolic and endocrine parameters in women with PCOS.
Methods
The  study  included  a  total  of  one  hundred  and  ninety-eight  women  of
reproductive age with PCOS, divided into two groups: group I (83 patients
with PCOS and SH) and group II (115 PCOS patients with normal thyroid
function). Endocrine and metabolic parameters were measured in all patients and
compared  between  women  with  and  without  elevated  thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) levels. Laboratory tests were included lipid profile, glucose
and insulin levels during oral glucose tolerance test, levels of C-reactive protein
(CRP), steroids, prolactin and TSH. We also analysed insulin resistance index
(HOMA-IR) and body mass index (BMI).
Results
PCOS women with SH showed higher values of total cholesterol (PZ0.01), CRP
(PZ0.001), HOMA-IR (PZ0.001), androgens and BMI (PZ0.01) compared to
PCOS women with normal thyroid function. Furthermore, there was a significant
correlation between subclinical hypothyroidism and metabolic, hormonal and
clinical parameters in women with PCOS. SH is significantly correlated with:
BMI (PZ0.01), HOMA-IR (PZ0.001), CRP (PZ0.001), cholesterol (PZ0.01)
and  with  androgens
(PZ0.001).  SH  is  negatively  correlated  with  SHBG
(PZ0.001).
Conclusion
Subclinical  hypothyroidism  significantly  correlated  with  polycystic  ovary
syndrome.  Subclinical  hypothyroidism  has  a  significant  impact  on  clinical,
metabolic and hormonal characteristics in patients with PCOS. Therefore, women
with diagnosed PCOS should be screened for thyroid dysfunction.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP685
EP686
Cigarette smoke exposure disturbed maturation of ovarian follicle and
induced abnormal growth of uterus inner wall of female rats
Hae-Miru Lee & Kyung-Chul Choi
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
Cigarette smoke (CS) is well known to be very harmful to human body functions
such as fertility, reproduction, and development. To elucidate the effect of CS on
women’s fertility more definitely, we examined the histophaological charac-
teristics of the uterus and ovary samples received from Korean Conformity
Laboratories (KCL), which were obtained from the female rats exposed to the
different amounts (low, medium, and high concentrations) of smoke of the
standard cigarette (3R4F) for 2 h/day and 5 days/week for 28 days according to
the  OECD  guidelines.  The  animals  used  for  the  present  study  were  the
spontaneously hypertensive female Wistar Kyoto (WK) rats. We manufactured
tissue slides from uterus and ovary samples and evaluated maturation of follicle of
ovary and uterus development through H&E and immunohistochemistry (IHC).
As a result, we confirmed decreased maturation of follicle and abnormal uterus
development by CS exposure. In IHC analysis on ovary tissues, the expression of
PCNA was decreased, but the expression of Bax, a pro-apoptotic protein, and
C/EBP  homologous  protein  (CHOP),  an  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)-stress
marker, was increased by exposure to CS compared to the control (ovary tissues
from non-exposed rats). For uterus, the thickness of inner wall of uterus was
decreased  by  the  exposure  to  CS  at  low  and  medium  concentrations.  In
accordance with this result, the expression of PCNA was decreased, but the
expression of Bax and CHOP was increased by exposure to CS at low and
medium concentrations. However, acute exposure to CS at high level induced the
abnormal over-growth of uterus wall. Taken together, the exposure of CS may
have a harmful effect on women’s fertility and pregnancy by inducing decreased
maturation of ovarian follicle and abnormal growth of uterus inner wall.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP686
EP687
Would thyroid binding globulin compensate for albumin loss during
pregnancy?
Fatima Al Yatama, Fawziah Mohammed, Hess Thani & Fatima Al Masoud
Kuwait University, Jabriyah, Kuwait.
Introduction
Normal thyroid function is necessary for normal body function. During pregnancy
if  the  thyroid  hormone  deficiency,  it  will  induce  maternal  and  fetal
hypothyroxinemia. And the vulnerable fetuses and neonates will suffer from
irreversible deficit in the neuro-psycointellectual development including mental
retardation. It is being established that albumin level decreases during pregnancy
with recorded increase in urine microalbumin, An elevation in both thyroid
stimulating hormone (TSH) and TBG levels was also described during pregnancy.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the relation between TSH and
TBG changes and its correlation to reduced albumin during the three trimesters of
pregnancy.
Method
Blood  samples  were  collected  from
20  healthy  nonpregnant
(control)  and
pregnant females at their first
(nZ32), second (nZ29) and third trimesters
(nZ30). Serum albumin, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and thyroid binding
globulin (TBG) were measured as well as urine microalbumin.
Results
Albumin levels were a significantly reduced P!0.01, by the third trimester
compared to control subjects. A small increase in urine microalbumin was noted
with progression of pregnancy, however, not significant. Measurements of TBG
and TSH showed a statistically significant increase in both parameters with the
progression of pregnancy, and the changes in TBG levels were negatively
correlated (rZK.08) with a similar percent of change noticed in albumin levels.
This was manifested by the 43%, 52% and 56% increase in the TBG levels in the
first, second and third trimesters compared to control respectively.
Conclusion
The albumin reduction during pregnancy is known to be resulting from the
increased glomerular filtration rate. Albumin is also known as a minor carrier
protein for thyroid hormones, therefore, we propose increased TBG levels is a
response and compensatory to the reduction in albumin to meet the high demand
for the fetus for the thyroid hormones.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP687
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP688
Endocan as a novel biomarker to evaluate cardiovascular risks in
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
Mahmut Apaydin1, Selvihan Beysel1, Mustafa Caliskan1,
Muhammed Kizilgul1, Ozgur Ozcelik1, Seyfullah Kan2, Mustafa Ozbek1,
Erman Cakal1 & Tuncay Delibasi3
1Diskapi Teaching and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Ankara
Teaching and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;3Kastamonu University
School of Medicine, Kastamonu, Turkey.
İntroduction
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is associated with risk of cardiovascular
disease
(CVD).  Endocan  is  potential  immunoinflammatory  and  endothelial
dysfunction marker that may be linked to CVD. This study aimed to evaluate the
risk of CVD in PCOS patients and to identify the novel biomarker for CVD risk.
Material and methods
We analyzed 52 premenopausal women with PCOS and 59 healthy controls.
Clinical, biochemical parameters and endocan were analysed.
Result
Ferriman Gallwey score, BMI, waist-hip ratio, HOMA-IR, total testosteron were
significantly  higher  in  PCOS  than  controls.  Serum  endocan  levels  were
significantly higher in the PCOS compared with the controls (457.19G239.32
vs 356.85G183.48 ng/ml, PZ0.015, respectively) (Table 1).
Table 1 The clinical, biochemical analyses of PCOS and controls.
Controls
PCOS
P
Age (years)
25.93G5.22
23.46G5.31
0.015
BMI (kg/m2)
22.56G3.23
26.90G5.69
0.001
Waist-hip ratio
0.77G0.66
0.85G0.54
0.012
Ferriman Gallwey Score
6.89G0.97
15.11G5.60
0.001
Glucose (mg/dl)
78.44G8.57
81.37G7.71
0.652
HOMA-IR
1.80G0.93
3.53G2.61
0.001
Total testosteron (pg/ml)
29.96G9.26
66.45G27.26
0.001
Endocan (ng/ml)
356.85G183.48
457.19G239.32
0.015
Conclusion
Endocan is a potential inflammatory and CVD biomarker in PCOS. Further
studies are needed to assess the relevance of endocan in CVD risk of PCOS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP688
EP689
Body composition in lean women with polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS) in relation to lipids and insulin resistance
Tamara Bogavac1, Ivana Bozic-Antic1, Dusan Ilic1, Jelica Bjekić-Macut2,
Danijela Vojnovic-Milutinovic3, Bojana Popovic1, Tatjana Isailovic1,
Valentina Elezovic1, Sanja Ognjanovic1, Olivera Stanojlovic4,
Svetozar Damjanovic1 & Djuro Macut1
1Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Clinial Center
of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;2CHC Bezanijska Kosa, Belgrade, Serbia;
3IBISS, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;4Institute of Physiology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction
PCOS women appear to have an adverse body composition (BC). The aim of this
study was to compare BC in lean PCOS in comparison to controls and to assess
possible metabolic consequences.
Methods
We evaluated 150 lean PCOS women (BMI: 20.96G2.06 kg/m2; age: 25.50G
4.52 years) diagnosed using ESHRE/ASRM criteria, and 39 lean BMI-matched
healthy women (BMI: 20.33G2.16 kg/m2; age: 27.67G5.39 years). BC was
evaluated using bioelectrical impedance (Tanita) and waist circumference (WC)
was measured. In follicular phase of menstrual cycle lipids, glucose, and insulin
were  determined.  Insulin  resistance  was  determined  by  homeostasis  model
assessment (HOMA-IR) and lipid ratios were calculated. All analyzes were age
adjusted.
Results
There were no difference between groups in WC (PZ0.066), whole body (WB)
fat mass (FM, PZ0.063), and WB fat free mass (FFM, PZ0.763), abdominal FM
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(AFM, PZ0.079) and abdominal FFM (AFM, PZ0.520), HDL (PZ0.777), LDL
(PZ0.065), LDL/HDL (PZ0.059), triglycerides/HDL (PZ0.086) and HOMA-
IR (PZ0.115). PCOS women in comparison to controls had higher FM/FFM ratio
(0.35G0.01  vs.
0.31G0.02,  respectively,  PZ0.044),  total  cholesterol
(TC)
(5.05G0.09 vs. 4.65G0.17, respectively, PZ0.037), triglycerides (0.92G0.03
vs.
0.78G0.06,  respectively,  PZ0.048),  non-HDL
(3.57G1.08
vs.
3.27G
0.80 mmol/l,  respectively,  PZ0.037),  TC/HDL
(3.51G0.07  vs.
3.18G0.13,
respectively, PZ0.029). In PCOS group FM/FFM correlated with WC (rZ0.561,
P!0.001), non-HDL (rZ0.176, PZ0.032), TC/HDL (rZ0.228, PZ0.005) and
LDL/HDL ratio (rZ0.196, PZ0.016).
Conclusion
Our lean  PCOS  women  had  the  same  BC  as  lean  controls  although  with
disproportional FM to FFM, and that suggested its possible involvement in the
pathogenesis of dyslipidemia in PCOS. As HOMA-IR index predominantly assess
hepatic insulin resistance, it could possibly explain lack of correlation between
FM/FFM and HOMA-IR.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP689
EP690
Turner syndrome and reproductive counseling
Nuno Vicente1, Helena Lopes2, Daniela Couto2, Paulo Cortes
˜o2,
Paula Sousa2, Luísa Barros1, Margarida Bastos1, Francisco Carrilho1 &
Teresa Almeida Santos2
1Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department, Coimbra, Portugal;
2Fertility Center - Reproductive Medicine Department, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Spontaneous fertility in Turner syndrome (TS) is rare, due to low or absent
ovarian reserve. A greater number of ovarian follicules is present in the cases of
gonadal mosaicism, although the accelerated pace of apoptosis remains. Thus, the
early referral to reproductive counseling is advisable, ideally soon after diagnosis.
The criopreservation of oocytes is one of the options for fertility preservation. The
authors present a series of 7 patients with TS admitted in Reproductive Medicine
Department between 2012 and 2015.
Case reports
Case 1: 33-years-old, karyotype 45,X, admitted with primary infertility. Because
of low ovarian reserve, she was advised about oocyte donation and cardiovascular
risks  of  pregnancy  were  explained.  Case
2:
37-years-old,  karyotype
45,X,
admitted for fertility preservation. After the second ovarian stimulation cycle
(OSC),  she  has
1
oocyte  criopreserved.  Case
3:
37-years-old,  karyotype
45,X/46,XX. Admitted with secondary infertility (one previous pregnancy three
years ago after in vitro fertilization). The two OSC were unsuccessful. Case 4:
16-years-old, karyotype 45,X/46,XX and admitted for fertility preservation. After
the first OSC, she has 11 criopreserved oocytes. Case 5: 33-years-old, admitted
with primary infertility, karyotype 45,X/46,XX. After the first OSC, three oocytes
were retrieved, originating 2 embryos, which were not transfered because of bad
development. Case 6: 24-years-old, karyotype 45,X. She was informed that
pregnancy is contraindicated because of cardiovascular disease (bicuspid aortic
valve with mild regurgitation). Case 7: 33-years-old, karyotype 45,X. Admitted
with primary infertility. The patient has a mild aortic aneurisma. She was referred
for oocyte donation because of poor ovarian reserve and will to conceive, despite
the risks.
Conclusion
These 7 cases illustrate the complexity of reproductive counseling in these
patients. Early referral increases the probability of success in oocyte preservation.
The ovarian reserve,  structural cardiovascular disease and ethical problems
condition the therapeutic options.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP690
EP691
Flutamide treatment in severe acne in women-still controversial
Anca Chiriac1,2, Liliana Foia3, Alina Urma4, Tudor Pinteala3 &
Anca E Chiriac3
1University Apollonia, Iasi, Romania;2Nicolina Medical Center, Iasi,
Romania;3University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania;4Saint
Mary Children Hospital, Iasi, Romania.
Guidelines recommend hormonal treatment in severe acne, in forms of acne with
no  response  to  standard  therapeutical  options,  in  women  with  proved
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
hyperandrogenism. Hormonal therapy for acne includes oral contraceptives;
anti-androgens, such as cyproterone acetate, spironolactone and flutamide; low-
dose glucocorticoids and gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists.
In daily practice there are many cases with moderate to severe forms of acne, in
young women without any clinical or hormonal abnormalities, who do not
respond to systemic antibiotics, associated with topical antibiotics, azelaic acid,
tretinoin, benzoyl peroxide or combinations.
We performed a study on 44 young women, with age ranging from 17 to 37 years,
with non-responding severe forms of acne after 6 months of therapy.
Endocrine examination was done at the beginning of the study measuring:
testosterone levels, BMI, calculating Ferriman hirsutism score and evaluating
liver function.
Out of 44 patients only 6 patients (13.4%) had high levels of testosterone and no
other  lab  abnormal  parameters.  We  presumed  a  high  affinity  of  androgen
receptors to normal level of testosterone and antiandrogen treatment was started.
Hormonal therapy was performed for 6 consecutive months using different
schemas such as: only flutamide 125 mg/day in 27 cases; flutamide 125 mg/day
associated with spironolactone 100 mg/day and metforfin 500 mg/day in 3 cases;
flutamide 125 mg/day plus utrogestan 100 mg/day and metformin 500 mg/day in
1 case; flutamide 125 mg/day and spirolonactone 50 mg/day in 6 cases; flutamide
125 mg/day and metformin 500 mg/day in 7 cases. The same topical anti acne
treatment was associated in each case: azelaic acid and erythromycin plus
tretinoin applied daily.
Good tolerability and no side effects have been declared.
Despite different association of hormonal therapy clearing of acne was achieved
at the end of 6 months of treatment with no difference, but in all cases rebounds
were observed after withdraw the hormonal therapy, despite the maintenance of
the topical treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP691
EP692
Resistant macroprolactinoma and infertility: a difficult challenge
Nesrine Cheikhrouhou, Ines Kammoun, Maria Khatib, Emna Fennira,
Leila Ben Salem & Claude Ben Slama
Department of endocrinology, National Institute of Nutrition, Tunis,
Tunisia.
Introduction
Dopamine agonist resistance is rare in prolactinoma (10%). Doses of cabergoline
of up to 2.0 mg/week are usually effective in controlling prolactin (PRL) secretion
and reducing tumor size. Surgical treatment is rarely indicated.
Case report
An 18-year-old female presented in 2002 with a 2-year history of amenorrhea and
galactorrhea. Hormonal investigation showed a hyperprolactinemia (4800 mUI/l)
with integrity of the other pituitary axis. The acromegaly was excluded. The
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 2 cm pituitary adenoma with
suprasellar extension. The visual field showed central bilateral scotoma.
The patient was initiated on bromocriptine, which was titrated to a daily dose of
15 mg. Subsequent MRI showed a decrease in the pituitary mass to 11 mm but
PRL never normalized during 6 years of bromocriptine and ranged from 1677 to
3074 mUI/l.
In 2010, she switched to cabergoline, which was titrated to a weekly dose of
2.5 mg. Subsequent MRI showed no amelioration, prolactin never normalized
and the patient was always in amenorrhea, despite compliance to cabergoline and
increasing to a weekly dose of 6 mg.
Finally, she was referred to neurosurgery and she underwent a transsphenoidal
endoscopic  resection  of  the  pituitary  adenoma.  The  immunohistochemical
analysis demonstrated positive staining for PRL (CCC) and LH(C). Ki-67
nuclear labeling was estimated at 1%.
The patient had no postoperative complications, with integrity of corticotrope and
thyretrope axis. But 3 months after the surgery, she had no resumption of menses
and the hormonal exploration showed a hyperprolactinemia (2668 mUI/l). The
serum HCG level was elevated. A spontaneous pregnancy of 13 weeks of
amenorrhea was diagnosed.
Conclusion
Although  rarely  indicated,  the  surgical  treatment  is  interesting  in  resistant
prolactinoma, especially in young woman with infertility.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP692
EP693
A 12-year-old virilized girl
Lucía Vera Pacheco, Cristina Del Peso Gilsanz, Lorena Rentero Redondo,
Amparo Meoro Avilés, María Teresa Gallego García, Flora Navarro Blaya
& Eugenio López López
Hospital Universitario Reina Sofia, Murcia, Spain.
Introduction
Hyperthecosis  ovarian  is  a  type  of  hyperandrogenism  and  severe  insulin
resistance, usually found in postmenopausal women.
Case Report
This case is about a 12 year-old girl who came to our hospital because of a rapidly
progressive virilization. She had no medical history. For the previous 10 months,
she had felt progressive growth of terminal hair in androgen-dependent areas,
abundant hair loss, facial acne and voice changes. Axilarche and pubarche had
occurred when she was 10 years old. She had not had menarche. She was not in
contact with exogenous testosterone preparations. Physical examination revealed
a score of 28 on the Ferriman Gallway scale, mild cervical acanthosis nigricans,
clitoris hypertrophy and Tanner stage 2 breast development. Laboratory tests
showed: glucose 78 mg/dl, HbA1c 4.8%, FSH 7.47 (follicular phase 3.6-12.5
mU/ml), LH 10.33 (follicular phase 1.7-12.5), 21.47 prolactin (6-30 ng/ml), 17
OH-PG 2.8 (0.1-1.4 ng/ml), DHEAS 96.3 (33.9-280 mcg/dl) androstenedione 3.1
(0.5-4.7 ng/ml), total testosterone 4.23 (0.06-0.82 ng/ml), free testosterone 6.2
(0.2-3.2 pg/ml), SHBG 7 (20-140 nmol/l), basal cortisol 28 (6.2-19.4 mcg/dl),
insulin 100.9 mIU/ml (2.6-24.9). Hypercortisolism and 21-hydroxylase defici-
ency tests were negative. The pelvic MRI showed enlarged ovaries with oval
morphology of 50!17!18 mm (right) and 48!19!18 mm (left). The patient
underwent a laparoscopic bilateral ovarian wedge resection. The pathology
showed  ovarian  hyperthecosis  with  androgen-positive  receptors.  After  the
surgery, the total testosterone levels were 4.12 ng/ml. Treatment was initiated
with  flutamide
250
mg/day  and  metformin
2000
mg/day.  The  patient
experimented the menarche two months after starting treatment. Currently it is
being considered to start GnRH analogues and hormone replacement therapy with
metformin.
Conclusions
The clinical interest of this case lies in the severity of the disease, early age of
onset and the difficult therapeutic management of the disease in premenopausal
women, with very little bibliography available.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP693
EP694
Correlation between dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate levels and
markers of bone turnover in hypothalamic amenorrhea
Antonio Mancini1, Daniela Romualdi2, Sebastiano Raimondo1, Christian Di
Florio2, Chantal Di Segni1, Carmine Bruno1, Rosanna Apa2 &
Antonio Lanzone2
1Operative Unit of Endocrinology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart,
Rome, Italy;2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic
University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
It is known that functional hypothalamic amenorrhea is associated with low bone
turnover due to low gonadal homone levels. Estrogens are critical for activation
of  bone  remodelling  units,  suppression  of  bone  reabsorption,  increase  of
1-25(OH)Vitamin D receptors expression. Other mechanisms could be operative,
including improper diet and unbalanced exercise; however the physiopathology
of such a condition is not entirely known. In order to evaluate the correlation
between  pituitary,  gonadal  and  adrenal  hormones  with  markers  of  bone
metabolism, we have studied a group of 21 female patients with a history of
secondary amenorrhea, lasting at least six months.
They were aged 19-35 ys, with a BMI range 17.5-19.5 kg/mq. Bone mineral
density (BMD) was determined by DXA scan at lumbar spine and neck of the
right hip femur. The following parameters were evaluated in a blood morning
sample:  FSH,  LH,  estradiol,  ACTH,  DHEAS,  osteocalcin,  bone  alkaline
phosphatase, beta-crosslaps, Vitamin D and PTH. Hormones were assayed by
CMIA or CLIA method; osteocalcin and beta-crosslaps by electrochemilumi-
nesce.
DXA  evaluation  showed  a  significant  reduction  in  BMD
(osteopenia  or
osteoporosis) in
8 patients
(T score at lumbar spine from K1.1 to K2.9).
MeanGSD FSH and LH levels were respectively 5.5G1.28 mUI/ml and 3.52G
3.13 mUI/ml; Estradiol levels were 31.1G7.7 pg/ml and 25(OH)-Vitamin D
28.8G7.2 ng/ml (with 13 patients with values in the range of Vit.D deficiency);
DHEAS, on the contrary, were in the normal range (2460.4G615.1 ng/ml) and
showed a significant direct correlation with osteocalcin (P!0.05).
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
These preliminary data suggest that, in presence of low estradiol levels, the main
regulation of bone formation could be represented by DHEAS. Further studies can
show the possible therapeutic implication of these data.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP694
EP695
High testosterone level in Chronic Liver Disease
Nawal Ibraheem, Ibrahim Shahbuddin, Ravi Gouni & Emily Mudenha
University Hospitals of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
A 26 year old lady under investigation for infertility was referred to our endocrine
clinic for raised testosterone levels at 6.6 nmol/l (0.5-2.8).she had regular period
with no features of hirsutism. Her past medical history included common acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia on chemotherapy, liver cirrhosis with portal hyperten-
sion secondary to chemotherapy, Trans jugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt
(TIPS) insertion for bleeding gastric varices.
Clinical examination she has no features of hirsutism.
Endocrine Investigations: Plasma Testosterone- 6.6 nmol/l, SHBG 139 nmol/l,
Androstenedione  35
nmol/l  were  high.  DHEAS,  Dihydrotestosterone,  TSH,
Prolactin, gonadotropins and oestrdiol were within reference range. Baseline and
post synacthen 17-hydroxypregestrone were normal. The repeat short synacthen
test showed normal cortisol response and follicular phase 17 OHP was not raised
making  congenital  adrenal  hyperplasia  unlikely.  Low  dose  dexamethasone
suppression  test  showed  supressed  cortisol,  testosterone,  androstadiene  and
DHEA which excludes adrenal/ovarian androgen producing tumours.
Her day 21 progesterone was reasonable but still she was unable to conceive. A
urine steroid profile showed low virilising androgen metabolites but increased
androstenetriol and normal a-cortlone levels. CT adrenals excluded ovarian and
adrenal pathology.
Discussion The high testosterone level in this patient was likely to be due to portal
hypertension secondary to liver cirrhosis. The majority of patients with liver
cirrhosis have raised SHBG concentrations which in fact will protect them from
virilising  symptoms.  This  accounts  for  the  less  free  plasma  testosterone
concentrations. As per our literature search we could find only one another
case  with  similar  condition.  We  do  not  believe  her  high  testosterone  is
contributing to her infertility especially when she does not have any signs of
androgenisation and we suspect virilisation risk of the foetus is extremely low if
she conceives. However foetus is completely protected by placental aromatase
which inactivates maternal androgens.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP695
EP696
Increased uric acid levels and clinical relationship in polycystic
ovary syndrome
Havva Keskin1, Ozge Timur2, Yasemin Kaya3, Mustafa Utlu2,
Faruk Yildiz2, Esra Nur Ademoglu4, Melek Kadi5, Mehmet Emin Budak2,
Hakan Gozcu2, Hakan Sevimli2, Senay Durmaz6, Ayse Carlioglu7 &
8
Zeynep Kamalak
1Medeniyet University, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;
2Regional Training and Research Hospital, Department of Internal
Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey;3Ordu University, Department of Internal
Medicine, Ordu, Turkey;4Abant Izzet Baysal University, Department of
Internal Medicine, Bolu, Turkey;5Regional Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Dermatology, Erzurum, Turkey;6Kirikkale University,
Department of Endocrinology, Kirikkale, Turkey;7Regional Training and
Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, Erzurum, Turkey;
8Buhara Medical Center, Department of Gynecology, Erzurum, Turkey.
Introduction
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine disorder that
affects women of reproductive age. Clinical and biochemical characteristics are
similar to metabolic syndrome. Insulin resistance in patients with metabolic
syndrome, is associated with serum uric acid levels. In our study, we aimed to
investigate the relationship between serum uric acid levels and clinical and
laboratory in PCOS patients.
Materials and Method
PCOS patients and 34 age and body mass index (BMI) matched control, a total of
206 cases attending at endocrinology outpatients clinic included in the study.
Early follicular phase, blood samples were taken after 12-hour fasting. Basal
serum hormone levels were measured by immunoassay.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
Uric acid levels was statistically significantly higher in PCOS than control group
(4.25G1.07 PCOS control 3.7G0.79, PZ0.048). Uric acid levels were positively
correlated with BMI, total cholesterol, insulin, cycle time, Feriman Gallwey score
and negatively correlated with HDL cholesterol levels. Uric acid levels were
higher than 2 times in PCOS group independently age and BMI with multivariate
logistic regression.
Conclusion
Uric acid levels in study group was significantly higher independent of age and
BMI. Cardiovascular risk factors; LDL, insulin, triglycerides, BMI was positively
correlated with uric acid in PCOS group. Clinical indicators; Feriman Gallwey
score and cycle time was also positively correlated. Elevated uric acid levels in
PCOS patients may be a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, may show negative
results in the clinic.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP696
EP697
Samia Ould Kablia, Malek Iabassen & Assya Cheikh
Central Hospital of the Army, Algiers, Algeria.
Introduction
Polycystic  ovary  syndrome
(PCOS)  is  a  common  endocrinopathy  affecting
6-10% of reproductive aged women. This syndrome is associated with obesity,
menstrual irregularity, infertility, hirsutism and insulin resistance. It has been
reported that PCOS is frequently associated with hyperprolactinemia with ranges
from 17 to 50%. So for many researchers the difficulty is to differentiate between
real PCOS associated with hyperprolactinemia or hyperprolactinemia with PCOS
aspect (chronic anovulation and polycystic ovaries.
Objective
This study aims to to identify the cause of hyperprolactinemia in patients with
PCOS.
Materials
A prospective  study  was  performed
(since
2010-2015)  on  100  PCOS.The
consensus of Rotterdam was used to make the diagnosis of PCOS. All patients
were screened for clinical exam, anovulation, prolactinemia, hypophysis MRI and
pelvic  ultrasound.  The  hyperprolactinemic  patients  were  first  treated  with
dopaminergic agonist.
Results
The mean BMI was 27.2 kg/m2 and the mean age 24.5 years. The mean
prolactinemia was 65 ng/ml Twelve (nZ12) of our patients had hyperprolacti-
nemia
(12%).  Among  them
9
(75%)  had  micro-prolactinoma,  one  used
neuroleptics and 2 were idiopatic (as no causes was found). All of them were
treated with dopaminergic agonist without improvement of the symptomatology.
Discussion
In our study hyperprolactinemia is quite frequent (12%) in PCOS women. In all
cases the diagnosis of hyperprolactinemia was made. In order to distinguish
PCOS with hyperprolactinemia from hyperprolactinemia with PCOS aspect,
agonist dopaminergic were used. The absence of improvement confirm the fact
that PCOS and hyperprolactinemia are distinct, in fact patients with PCOS do not
respond to bromocriptine treatment because they do not have alterations in
hypothalamic dopamine secretion.
Conclusion
It‘s important to make a systematic investigation on the origin of hyperprolacti-
nemia in women with chronic anovulation in order to distinguish it from PCOS. In
all of our patient a well-defined cause for the high PRL level was identified.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP697
EP698
Can weight loss reverse polycystic ovary syndrome?
Wafa Grira, Ines Kammoun, Hana Zoubeidi, Hayfa Sfar, Leila Ben Salem &
Claude Ben Slama
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Institute of
Nutrition, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Weight loss is a mainstay in the treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
While the cause of this complex endocrine disorder remains unknown, it’s
approved that weight loss improves symptoms of PCOS. We report a case of a
patient with PCOS. Her symptoms disappeared totally after losing 50kg
Case report
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
In 2005, a 16-year-old girl presented for evaluation of spaniomenorrhoea and
obesity. Physical examination showed a weight of 88 kg, a body mass index
(BMI) of 37.5 kg/m2, a waist circumference of 85 cm and a normal blood pressure
(110/80 cmHg). The patient had no clinical signs of hyperandrogenism. Serum
testosterone  and  luteinizing  hormone  levels  were  elevated,  while  follicle-
stimulating hormone, prolactin and 17-OH progesterone levels were normal.
Fasting blood glucose, oral glucosetolerance test and serum lipid profile were
normal. Pelvic ultrasound showed bilateral polycystic ovaries. There were no
clinical signs of Cushing syndrome. The diagnosis of PCOS was established. She
was evaluated by a nutritional therapist and given lifestyle advice to reduce
weight and increase physical activity. Metformin 1.7 g/day (850 mg*2) was
started in order to improve insulin sensitivity.
Within 2 years, there was a 20 kg weight reduction and her BMI decreased to 27.9
kg/m2. Menses were normal without progesterone medication during 3 years. But
thereafter the patient no longer followed life style rules, she gained weight to
). She presented for obesity and secondary
102 kg in 3 years (BMI:42.3 Kg/m2
amenorrhea (since 6 months). Lifestyle changes and metformin therapy were
reapplied.
Now, 2 years after lifestyle changes and metformin therapy, the patient weights 52 kg
(BMI: 24.3 kg/m2). She has normal ovulatory cycles and normal testosterone.
Conclusions
Our  case  illustrates  the  close  relationship  between  overweight  and  PCOS.
Therefore, lifestyle changes should be the first-line intervention in these patients,
especially in presence of obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP698
Growth hormone IGF axis - basic
EP699
A placebo-controlled study of repeated subcutaneous doses of COR-005
alone or with octreotide on GHRH-stimulated GH and
pharmacokinetics in healthy male subjects
Klaus Kutz1, Manuel Haschke2, Christoph Beglinger2, Jiří Liška3,
Carsten Dehning4 & Fredric Cohen5
1AccelPharm, Basel, Switzerland;2University Hospital Basel, Basel,
Switzerland;3CEPHA sro, Pilsen, Czech Republic;4Aspireo Pharma-
ceuticals Ltd, Tel Aviv, Israel;5Strongbridge Biopharmaceuticals plc,
Trevose, PA, USA.
Octreotide is first-line medical therapy for patients with acromegaly. Up to 80%
of patients are not satisfactorily controlled on octreotide alone and up to 20% have
no response. COR-005 (previously DG3173) is a novel somatostatin analogue
under investigation for treatment of acromegaly. COR-005 has high affinity for
human somatostatin receptor subtypes 2, 4 and 5.
The study was designed to assess pharmacokinetics of escalating doses COR-005
sc tid and compare the pharmacodynamics of COR-005 alone or in combination
with octreotide 300 mg sc tid for 6.3 days versus octreotide 300 mg sc tid alone and
placebo on GHRH-stimulated GH profiles.
A total of 42 subjects (6 total per group) received placebo (P, NZ1/gp), octreotide
300 mg tid (O, NZ1/gp) or COR-005 alone (C, NZ4/gp) as 100 mg, 300 mg,
900 mg, or 1800 mg C tid or as 100 mg or 300 mg or 900 mg C in combination with
O. GHRH stimulation was performed before first and after four treatments.
Maximal inhibition of GHRH-stimulated GH by COR-005 or octreotide alone
was ranked as follows: P ! (100 mg C or 300 mg C) ! (900 mg C or O)
!1800 mg C. GH inhibition with combinations of COR-005 and O were in the
order of: O ! (OC100 mg C and OC300 mg C) ! OC900 mg C. COR-005 Tmax
was %1 hour and t1/2 was w2 h after first and last injections. Cmax and AUC0-8
increased dose-linearly. Co-administration of COR-005 with O did not affect C
PK below 900 mg, greater variability in C AUC0-8 was noted at 900 mg.
COR-005 inhibits dose-dependently GHRH-stimulated GH with less potency but
similar maximal efficacy as maximally dosed octreotide.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP699
EP700
Quality of Life (QoL) and IGF-I Status in Adults with Severe GHD
Stephen Shalet1, Peter Jonsson2, Andreas Pleil3, Cecilia Camacho-Hubner4
& Roger Abs5
1Division of Endocrinology, Manchester, UK;2Endocrine Care, Pfizer
Health AB, Pfizer Health AB, Sollentuna, Sweden;3Global Health and
Value, Pfizer Inc., La Jolla, USA;4Endocrine Care, Pfizer, Inc., New York,
USA;5Antwerp Centre for Endocrinology, Antwerp, Belgium.
Introduction
In adult patients with pituitary disease no relationship has been established
between the biochemical severity of GHD and the degree of QoL impairment.
Reasons may include heterogeneity of underlying pathologies, and the type of
therapies received by GHD patients.
Methods
The KIMS (Pfizer International Metabolic Database) database was used to focus
solely on patients with non-functioning pituitary adenomas and prolactinomas
treated by surgery alone. Entry criteria include peak GH of less than 3 ng/ml to an
ITT and at least 2 other pituitary hormone deficits. IGF-I was measured centrally
and IGF-I SDS calculated using normal range for age and gender. Health-related
QoL  was  measured  using  QoL-AGHDA,  a disease-specific  validated  ques-
tionnaire for which higher scores (0-25) indicate worse QoL. In the UK, QoL-
AGHDA scores alone are used to determine treatment eligibility.
Results
The analysis was performed separately for UK data versus the collective other
European countries (Belgium, Germany, Sweden, France, Holland, Spain) data.
Median AGHDA score at baseline for UK (nZ68) was 15.5 and for Europe
(nZ299) 7.0 (P!0.0001) whilst median IGF-I SDS for UK (nZ54) was K0.87
and for Europe (nZ178) -1.53 (PZ0.0042). The UK cohort have much greater
impairment of QoL but are less severely GHD than the Europe cohort, implying a
significant component of impaired QoL in the UK cohort is unrelated exclusively
to their GH status.
Conclusions
The literature indicates that QoL improves significantly in UK GHD adults in
response to GH replacement, however our results question a treatment strategy
focused on QoL alone, a medical endpoint not shown to be related to the degree
of GHD, and affected by multiple factors; for all other endocrine deficits the
classical approach is to treat those with biochemical evidence of the severest
deficit first.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP700
EP701
Batch-to-batch consistency of a highly o-glycosylated long-acting
human growth hormone (MOD-4023)
Laura Moschcovich, Rachel Guy, Yana Felikman, Miri Zakar &
Oren Hershkovitz
OPKO Biologics, Nes Ziona, Israel.
Background
OPKO Biologics is a clinical-stage public company developing long-acting
therapeutic proteins utilizing CTP technology. The technology involves fusion of
the C-terminal peptide of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which is highly
O-glycosylated, to the target protein. CTP enabled the production of a long-acting
human growth hormone (hGH) (MOD-4023), which supports a single weekly
injection in growth hormone-deficient patients. MOD-4023 is manufactured as a
non-viscous liquid formulation.
Aims
The objective of the study was to develop a highly O-glycosylated drug product
with respect to protein quality attributes, process reproducibility, and batch-
to-batch consistency.
Methods
The consistency of MOD-4023 glycosylation was tested by applying various
analytical  methods,  including  O-glycan  and  sialic  acid  analysis  by  HPLC,
capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE), and isoelectric focusing (IEF). MOD-4023
potency was assessed in vitro by a cell-based assay (CBA), utilizing cells that
stably express the human growth hormone receptor (GHR).
Results
Similar O-glycan and sialic acid contents were obtained in different of MOD-
4023 batches, supporting the consistency of the drug substance glycosylation
profile for each batch. Comparable results for different batches were also obtained
using both CZE and IEF analysis. Several batches of MOD-4023 had shown
similar levels of binding and activation of the human GHR.
Conclusions
A robust manufacturing process was developed for the production of MOD-4023
DS, producing a highly reproducible O-glycosylated product.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP701
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP702
Macronutrient composition has sex specific effects on the GH-IGF-I axis
Larissa Kavermann, Kirstin Andersen, Amon Horngacher &
Martin Bidlingmaier
Endocrine Research Unit, Medical Clinic and Policlinic IV, University
Hospital Munich, Munich, Germany.
Metabolic diseases are among the most important diseases in western societies
and  usually  related  to  obesity.  Dietary  interventions  are  recommended  for
treatment and include both strategies with reduced caloric intake and alterations
in macronutrient composition. Metabolism must be assumed to be regulated
differently in females and males. In previous studies we demonstrated that low
carbohydrate high fat (LCHF) diets affect GH/IGF-I axis in male rats. We know
investigated whether the same effects can be seen in females, and also included a
high carbohydrate, high fat diet (HCHF) in our study. Purified diets (% of
metabolizable  energy,  fat/protein/carbohydrate:  Chow
(CH,
16.7/19.0/64.3),
protein matched LCHF-1 (78.7/19.1/2.2), ketogenic LCHF-2 (92.8/5.5/1.7) and
HCHF (61.9/18.7/19.4)) were pair-fed isoenergetically for 4 weeks to male and
female Wistar rats (12 weeks at start, nZ7/group). GH secretion profiles were
collected (10 samples/5 hours) after 3 weeks. At study end (6 hours fasting, dark
phase), blood samples and organs were collected. Pituitary GHRHR and GH as
well as liver GHR and IGF-I mRNA were analyzed. Serum GH secretion showed
higher nadirs and lower peaks in females. On the ketogenic LCHF-2, GH tended
to be lower in both sexes, while GH was increased on HCHF only in females. In
males, IGF-I (ng/mL) was significantly reduced on all HF diets (CH: 1441G
79.13,  LCHF-1:
961.9***G31.48,  LCHF-2:
940.2***G39.87,  HCHF:
993.6***G14.78), but only on the ketogenic LCHF-2 diet in females (CH:
713.3G49.0,  LCHF-1:
588.0G48.15,  LCHF-2:
463.3***G34.58,  HCHF:
574.4G26.4). Pituitary GH mRNA was generally higher in females, and lowest
in rats of both sexes fed LCHF-2. In both sexes, GHRHR mRNA was reduced on
all HF diets (males: CH: 0.07G0.01, LCHF-1: 0.04G0.01, LCHF-2: 0.04G0.01,
HCHF: 0.03G0.01*; females: CH: 0.08G0.01, LCHF-1: 0.03G0.02, LCHF-2:
0.03G0.01*, HCHF: 0.04G0.01). Liver GHR mRNA tended to be lower on
LCHF-1 and LCHF-2 in both sexes and increased on HCHF in females. Our data
demonstrate that HF diets lead to a more pronounced deterioration of the
GH/IGF-I  axis  in  males.  Whether  hypothalamic  or  pituitary  mechanisms
regulating GH secretion or peripheral mechanisms regulating GH sensitivity
cause the sex difference is currently studied.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP702
EP703
High normal TSH - risk factor for subclinical hypothyroidism in GH
treatement for pituitary dwarfism?
Alina Daniela Belceanu1, Anamaria Bursuc1, Ioana Armasu1, Georgiana
Andreea Constantinescu1, Iulia Crumpei1, Letitia Leustean1,
Mihaela Anton2 & Carmen Vulpoi1
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, Department of
Endocrinology, Iasi, Romania;2Department of Endocrinology, Bacau,
Romania.
Background
Normal thyroid function is necessary for the optimal effect of recombinant growth
hormone (rhGH) on growth rate. GH therapy in children with GH deficiency
(GHD) has yielded conflicting results concerning its impact on thyroid function.
Data about patients developing subclinical hypothyroidism (SH) are scanty, but it
is thought to be associated with impairment of metabolic profile and lower growth
response.
Objective
To evaluate the effect of rhGH administration on TSH tertiles and FT4, the
frequency of SH, as well as to assess its influence on therapy effectiveness.
Method
We reviewed the cases of 75 children (59 boys, 16 girls, aged 4K14) with
pituitary dwarfism. Clinical and hormonal data, as well as radiographic bone
assessments were documented at the beginning, 6 months and after first year of
treatment.
Results
At therapy onset, all patients had the height below K2.5 SD (mean K3.2),
delayed bone age, decreased or low normal IGF1 and normal thyroid function.
After one year of therapy, SH was the only impairment in thyroid function in 12
patients (16%). The risk of SH was increased among subjects with the highest
tertile TSH as compared with subjects with the lowest tertile (P!0.05). Despite
similar  IGF1
secretion  increase,  the  improvement  of  height  velocity  was
significantly lower in children with SH (0.65 cm/month) than in those who
remained euthyroid (0.88 cm/month, P!0.05). An increase in IGF1 levels was
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
associated with increasing levels of TSH in SH patients and led in four cases to
administration of LKT4 substitution.
Conclusion
The incidence of SH during the first year of rhGH treatment in children with GHD
and the influence on the growth rate should be taken into account, as it may
worsen  the  growth  response.  Our  findings  suggest  that  suboptimal  thyroid
function increases vulnerability to the occurrence of SH in children treated with
rhGH, needing a closer monitoring.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP703
EP704
Concomitant medication in growth hormone (GH)-treated patients
with adult GH deficiency (AGHD): an analysis from NordiNetw
International Outcome Study (IOS)
Charlotte Hoybye1, Effie Pournara2, Birgitte Tønnes Pedersen3 & Jens Otto
Lunde Jørgensen4
1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute and
Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetology, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden;2Novo Nordisk Health Care AG,
Zurich, Switzerland;3Epidemiology, Novo Nordisk A/S, Søborg, Denmark;
4Medical Department M, University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
Introduction
Patients  with  AGHD  receiving  GH  often  have  comorbidities  requiring
concomitant treatment. We evaluated patterns of concomitant medication use
relative to GH therapy initiation in patients with AGHD.
Methods
Patients  with  AGHD  with  data  on  concomitant  medications  enrolled  in
NordiNetw  IOS  (NCT00960128),  an  international,  non-interventional  study,
receiving  GH
(Norditropinw,  Novo  Nordisk  A/S,  Denmark)  therapy  were
included. Concomitant medications were grouped by main therapeutic proper-
ties/target  body  system  into  nine  treatment  clusters.  Start  of  concomitant
medication  in  each  cluster  was  analysed  relative  to  GH  therapy  initiation
(before/at[G2 months]/after). The association between concomitant medication
start and GH initiation (after versus before) was analysed by chi-square test.
Results
Overall, 14,412 prescriptions of concomitant medications were recorded for 986
patients (female, 42%; adult-onset AGHD, 88%), representing 42% of all patients
with AGHD in NordiNetw IOS. The most frequent treatment clusters and numbers
of  patients
(%  patients  with first prescription  before/at/after  GH initiation)
receiving at least one treatment in each cluster were: hormone (other pituitary/sex
hormones) replacement, 952 (60%/20%/20%); cardiovascular system therapies,
169
(43%/17%/41%); nutrition and supplements, 97 (28%/23%/49%); diabetes
treatment,
61
(33%/25%/43%);  osteoporosis  treatment,
53
(32%/23%/45%);
nervous  system  treatment,
44
(34%/30%/36%);  pain  relievers,
46
(52%/17%/30%); prolactin suppression therapy, 44 (50%/18%/32%); fertility
treatment, 14 (57%/0%/43%); miscellaneous, 90 (41%/23%/36%). Except for
hormone replacement therapy, and nutrition and supplements (P!0.05 for both),
no significant differences were shown in the proportions of patients receiving their
first concomitant medication prescription after versus before GH initiation within
treatment clusters.
Conclusions
Hormone replacement and cardiovascular system treatments were the most
frequently prescribed concomitant medications. There was no change in the
proportion  of first  prescriptions  for  cardiovascular  system,  diabetes  or
osteoporosis treatments after versus before GH therapy initiation. The high
proportion of prescriptions for other hormone replacement therapy before GH
initiation indicates GH might often be the last pituitary hormone to be substituted.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP704
EP705
Shipment associated effects on the somatotropic axis in pigs - a pilot
study
Elisa Wirthgen1,2, Christine Hoflich2, Martin Kunze1 & Andreas Hoeflich1
1Institute for Genome Biology, Leibniz-Institute for Farm Animal Biology
(FBN), Dummerstorf, Germany;2Ligandis GbR, Gulzow-Pruzen, Germany.
Transport of farm animals is considered as a key stress factor including multiple
stressors as handling or fasting. In humans, compounds for the IGF-system are
affected by acute or critical illness or stress. We have asked, if compounds from
the IGF-system also may have biomarker potential in farm animals. A total of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
80 pigs were transported for 2 h from a commercial finishing farm to the
slaughterhouse. Blood samples from 40 pigs were taken before (basal levels) and
after shipment and after lairage and slaughter. A control group of 40 pigs without
blood collection before slaughtering was investigated to determine potential
effects of blood sampling on parameters in slaughter blood. In plasma, IGF-1 and
IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs) were analyzed using ELISA and quantitative
Western Ligand Blotting. The ratio of IGF-1 to the total amount IGFBPs was
calculated to examine the IGF-1 bioavailability. Shipment severely reduced
plasma IGF-1 (P!0.01) in pigs if compared to pre-shipment conditions. IGFBP-3
and
-2
concentrations  decreased  with  prolonged  time  leading  to  reduced
(P!0.01) concentrations in slaughter blood compared to basal levels. In contrast,
IGFBP-5 was increased (P!0.001) after shipment but normalized after lairage
and slaughter. The ratio of IGF-1/IGFBPs, and thus IGF-1 bioavailability was
reduced (P!0.01) after shipment but not after lairage or slaughter. Repeated
blood sampling increased concentrations of IGFBP-3 and IGF-1 compared to
controls. The results indicate that acute stress factors during shipment or repeated
blood sampling induces changes in somatotropic axis. Our findings indicate that
the somatotropic axis may have biomarker potential for defined conditions of
stress, which may be useful in order to improve animal health and welfare in pigs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP705
EP706
The association between neutrophil and lymphocyte ratio in patients
diagnosed with acromegaly
Kenan 
¸ adırcı1, Yasemin Kaya2, S¸ enay Durmaz3, Abdulmuttalip Arslan1 &
Ay¸e 
¸ arlıo
˘ lu1
1Department of İnternal Medicine, Erzurum Training and Research
Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of İnternal Medicine, Ordu
University, Ordu, Turkey;3Department of İnternal Medicine, Kırıkkale
University, Kırıkkale, Turkey.
Aim
İmpaired glucose tolerance and hyperinsulinism/insulin resistance frequently
accompany by acromegaly. NLO (Neutrophile lymphocyte ratio) is demonstrated
as a simple indicator of systemic inflammation and it is also known that NLO is
associated with atherosclerosis progression in coronary artery and a risk factor in
coroner artery disease. In this study, we intend to search the association between
both  coronary  atherosclerosis  seen  frequently  in  patients  diagnosed  with
acromegaly and glucose metabolism disorders occurring based on hyperinsulin-
ism as the result of excessive GH release and NLO ratio.
Method
This study included 106 persons which 59 of them were patients with acromegaly
and 47 of them who were healthy and no significantly different statistically in
terms of age were in control group. The mean age of patients was 44.1G13.8
years and the mean age of control group was 38.8G15.4 years. There was no a
significant difference statistically between them (PZ0.06).
Result
In our results, we statistically detected a significant difference in NLO level (mean
NLO  levels  2.1G1.0  in  acromegaly  group  vs.  1.5G0.6  in  control  group,
respectively,  PZ0.002)  CRP  level
(mean  CRP  level
3.5G3.3 mg/dl  in
acromegaly group vs. 1.3G1.2 mg/dl control group, respectively, PZ0.004).
There was a significant difference statistically between the patients and control
groups, respectively in terms of neutrophile (4.9G1.9 and 3.9G1.2 PZ0.01),
fasting blood glucose (111.6G37.1 and 88.2G6.8 PZ0.0001) and fasting insulin
levels
(20.1G19.3
and
8.4G6.7
PZ0.03). It  was  determined  a positive
correlation between NLO and neutrophile (rZ0.58, PZ0.0001), between CRP
and HOMA score (rZ0.61, PZ0.003) in the patients with acromegaly.
Discussion
Based on the outcomes provided by this study, it was found that excessive growth
hormone release formed an inflammatory environment by effecting glucose
mechanism and also increasing coroner atherosclerosis
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP706
EP707
Robust viral clearance capacity of CTP-modified long-acting growth
hormone (MOD-4023) downstream production process
Miri Zakar, Laura Moschcovich & Oren Hershkovitz
OPKO Biologics, Nes Ziona, Israel.
Background
OPKO Biologics is a clinical-stage public company developing long-acting
therapeutic proteins utilizing CTP technology. The technology involves fusion of
the  C-terminus  peptide  of  human  chorionic  gonadotropin
(hCG),  a  highly
O-glycosylated peptide, to the target protein. CTP enabled the production of a
long-acting human growth hormone (hGH) (MOD-4023) that supports a single-
weekly injection in growth hormone-deficient patients. MOD-4023 is manu-
factured as a non-viscous liquid formulation.
Objective
Effective inactivation and/or removal of viruses in the downstream manufacturing
process of MOD-4023 was validated as part of the regulatory requirement to
demonstrate the safety of pharmaceutical products derived from a biological
source.
Design and methods
The overall study design consists of a detergent-based virus inactivation step, a
virus  filtration  step,  and  three  chromatographic  steps
(anion  exchange
chromatography, mixed-mode chromatography, and cation exchange chroma-
tography). Chromatography-based removal of four different viruses with distinct
characteristics was evaluated with fresh resins and with used resins at the end of
column lifetime. In addition, carry-over runs were conducted, in which the
effectiveness of the regeneration/sanitization procedures was evaluated. In these
studies, the removal of residual viruses potentially left on the column was
demonstrated using non-virus-spiked runs.
Results
The viral validation study had demonstrated that the manufacturing process of
MOD-4023 provides a total clearance of O20 log for lipid-enveloped viruses
and O9 log for chemically resistant, non-enveloped small viruses. Moreover, the
process consists of 2 to 5 robust removal steps for each of the viruses.
Conclusions
The manufacturing process of MOD-4023 provides a robust removal of viruses,
with high virus reduction capabilities and high safety margins (O14 log). The
study demonstrates a safe production process, in accordance with FDA and EMA
requirements.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP707
EP708
Acromegaly and Dyslipidemia
Havva Keskin1, Kenan 
¸ adırcı2, Yasemin Kaya3, S¸ enay Durmaz4,
Abdulmuttalip Arslan2, Faruk Yıldız2, Hakan Gozcu2, Hakan Sevimli2,
Mehmet Emin Budak2 & Ay¸e 
¸ arlıo
˘ lu2
1Department of İnternal Medicine, Medeniyet University, Goztepe Training
and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of İnternal Medicine,
Erzurum Training and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;3Department of
İnternal Medicine, Ordu University, Ordu, Turkey;4Department of İnternal
Medicine, Kırıkkale University, Kırıkkale, Turkey.
Aim
The risk of cardiovascular mortality is high in patients with acromegaly. In this
study, we intent to evaluate serum lipid profile in patients newly diagnosed with
acromegaly and determine its association with increased growth hormone (gh)
and insulin like growth factor-1 (igf-1) levels.
Material and method
This study includes 57 patients newly diagnosed with acromegaly in our hospital
(mean age 44.1G13.8 years; mean bmi 29.6G5.4 kg/m2) and 31 persons in
control group who have similar age and bmi (mean age 38.8G15.4 years; mean
bmi 26.9G7.3 kg/m2). None of the patients were on antilipemic drug. All venous
blood sampling were taken for gh, igf-1, triglycerides (tg) and hdl-c, ldl-c were
taken in 12 hours fasting state.
Findings
In our results, we statistically detected a significant difference in ldl level (mean
ldl-c levels 140.2G61.3 mg/dl in acromegaly group vs. 115.6G30.4 mg/dl in
control group, respectively, PZ0.029), triglyceride level (mean tg levels 137.6G
84.0 mg/dl in acromegaly group vs. 102.9G43.0 mg/dl control group, respect-
ively, PZ0.027) and hdl level (mean hdl levels 41.5G10.5 mg/dl in acromegaly
group vs. 50.5G10.6 mg/dl in control group, respectively, PZ0.001) between the
patients  with  acromegaly  and  the  control  group.  It  was  found  a  positive
correlation between gh and ldl-c (rZ0.375, PZ0.02) and tg (rZ0.302, PZ0.01).
There was also a significant positive correlation between igf-1, ldl-c (rZ0.295,
PZ0.01)  and tg (rZ0.476, PZ0.0001).  Additionally,  it was determined a
significant negative correlation between gh - hdl (rZK0.399, PZ0.001) and
igf-1 - hdl (rZK0.310, PZ0.01).
Results
In conclusion, growth hormone and igf-1 increase may be establishing a ground
for atherosclerotic heart diseases by leading to proatherogenic lipid profile in
patients with acromegaly. Therefore, it might be important to follow closely lipid
levels in acromegaly monitorization.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP708
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP709
The frequency of growth hormone deficiency in patients with
nonfunctional pituitary tumors
Yulduz Urmanova1 & Mushtary Saidnazirkhanova2
1Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan;2Republican
Specialized Scientific-Practical Medical Center of Endocrinology under the
Ministry of Health of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Aim
To study the frequency of growth hormone deficiency (GHD) in patients with
nonfunctional pituitary tumors (NFPA).
Materials and methods
Over a period of 1.0 year, we studied in our department retrospective data of 33
patients with pituitary tumors in terms of CT/MRI imaging and detailed hormonal
functional assessment - STH, IGF-1, LH, FSH, ACTH, prolactin, TSH, cortisol,
thyroxine. From the patients are 11 - men and 12 women, mean age of patients
38.5 years.
Results
Microadenomas
(!10 mm)  were  found  in
11
patients,  mesoadenomas
(11-20 mm) in 11, macroadenomas (20-30 mm) in 11 patients.
Panhypopituitarism (PH) was noted in six persons (18.3%), PH with diabetes
insipidus in 5 (15.2%), isolated GHD in 7 (21.2%), GHD and LH deficiency in 2
(6.0%), GHD and LH, FSH deficiency - in 11 patients (33.3%), GHD and LH,
FSH, TSH deficiency in 2 (6.0%) Hypopituitarsin, that is, reduction in the levels
of pituitary tropic hormones, such as, STH, LH and FSH was found in 75%
(25 patients) large pituitary tumors with supra-, para- and infrasellar growth being
registered in the patients.
Conclusions
The distribution of GHD in patients with NFPA has a lot of various disorders with
combined deficiency of pituitary hormones levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP709
EP709B
Weight loss after pregnancy is associated with reduced IGFBP-3 and
increased cGP/IGF-1 ratio
Jian Guan1, Karen Liu1, Gagan Singh Mallah1, Lesley McCowan5,
Paul Shorten2, John Thompson3, Ed Mitchell3, Rennae Taylor5,
Paul Harris6, Margaret Brimble6 & Rinki Murphy4
1Department Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, School of Medical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand;2AgResearch Ltd, Ruakura Research Centre,
Hamilton, New Zealand;3Department of Paediatrics, School of Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, the University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand;4Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of
Chemistry, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand;5Department
of O&G, School of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, the
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand;6Department of
Medicinal Chemistry, School of Chemistry, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand.
Background
Impaired Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) function is associated with obesity
and hypertension, but the correlation of circulating IGF-1 with these conditions is
weak.  As  a  metabolite  of  IGF-1,  the  ratio  of  cGP/IGF-1
regulates  IGF-1
bioavailability and may be a more accurate biomarker of IGF-1 function in
obesity and hypertension.
Methods
Using ELISA and HPLCms methodologies, we analysed plasma concentration
of  IGF-1,  cGP  and  IGFBP-3
in
40  women  that  grouped  as  non-obeseC
normotensive,  obeseCnormotensive;  non-obeseChypotensive  and  obeseC
hypertensive  at  both
15  weeks  gestation  and
6 years  post-partum  of first
pregnancy. Only post-partum samples were analysed in hypotensive women. We
also analysed the samples from a further 20 women that either were obese during
first pregnancy or became non-obese 6 years post-partum or vice versa.
Results
At 6 years post-partum: plasma IGF-1 levels were lower among obese (PZ0.001)
groups; cGP (PZ0.043) and IGFBP-3 (PZ0.046) was lower among hypertensive
groups; cGP/IGF-1 ratio was no difference among hypotension groups but higher
among obese (PZ0.005) groups. In the paired samples at 15 weeks gestation and
6 years post-partum: the change in plasma IGF-1 was lower in the groups that
changed from being obese to normal (PZ0.004) and that remained to be obese
(PZ0.018) compared to non-obese controls. Compared to normal control group,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
group with weight loss after pregnancy had an increase in cGP/IGF-1 ratio (PZ
0.01) and a decrease in IGFBP-3 (PZ0.0001); the group that gained weight had a
decrease in IGFBP-3 (PZ0.03), but no change in cGP/IGF-1 ratio and the group
remained to be obese had an increase in cGP/IGF-1 ratio (PZ0.006), but no
changes in IGFBP-3.
Conclusions
Increase in cGP/IGF-1 ratio is observed in obesity but not hypertension. The
collective responses of reduced IGFBP-3 and increased cGP/IGF-1 ratio may be
essential to weight loss.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP709B
EP710
Androgen profiling in males of two high-fertility mouse models does not
reveal a distinct phenotype but provides new reference values for
androgens in mice
Joachim M Weitzel1, Marten Michaelis1, Alexander Sobczak1,
Martina Langhammer2, Gerd Nurnberg2, Norbert Reinsch2, Michaela
F Hartmann3, Stefan A Wudy3 & Jennifer Schon1
1Institut fur Fortpflanzungsbiologie, Leibniz-Institut fur Nutztierbiologie,
Dummerstorf, Germany;2Institut fur Genetik und Biometrie, Leibniz-
Institut fur Nutztierbiologie, Dummerstorf, Germany;3Steroid Research &
Mass Spectrometry Unit, Zentrum fur Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmedizin,
Justus Liebig Universitat Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
Animal models are valuable tools in fertility research. Worldwide, there are more
than 1000 transgenic or knockout mouse models available showing a reproductive
phenotype; almost all of them exhibit an infertile or at least subfertile phenotype.
By contrast, animal models revealing an improved fertility phenotype are barely
described. We developed two outbred mouse models exhibiting a ‘high-fertility’
phenotype. These mouse lines were generated via selection over a time period of
more than 40 years and 170 generations. By now both mouse lines doubled the
number of offspring as well as the total birth weight per litter.
We performed a two-factorial experiment by mating males and females of the
three different genotypes (fertility line #1 (FL1), fertility line #2 (FL2) and control
line (ctrl)) in all 9 possible combinations. We observed that increased fertility
performance almost completely depended on the genotype of the females. Though
not significant, the largest effect has been observed for males of the FL2 line. We
noticed that the two independent fertility lines warranted the phenotype ‘high
fertility’ using different physiological strategies.
In order to test whether this is reflected by different endocrine concentrations,
we measured androgen concentrations in serum of males of the three lines (FL1,
FL2, ctrl) using a gas chromatography-mass spectrometer (GC-MS) method. We
measured  testosterone  concentrations  between
5.0
and
6.4
ng/ml  with  no
difference  between  the  lines.  We  also  measured  other  androgens
(4-
androstenedione: not detectable (nd) K0.06 ng/ml; dehydroepiandrosterone: nd
K0.31 ng/ml; androstenediol: 0.14 to 0.39 ng/ml; dihydrotestosterone: 0.08 to
0.19 ng/ml). These androgen concentrations are at least 10-fold lower compared
to testosterone. Since androgen concentrations in the mouse, measured by the
“gold standard” GC-MS, are barely described in the literature we have to consider
these concentrations as reference values in mice.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP710
EP711
Altered testicular vascularization and impaired blood supply in the
41,XXY* mouse model for Klinefelter syndrome
Cristin Brand1, Oliver S Damm1, Ann-Sophie Warmeling1,
Reinhild Sandhowe-Klaverkamp1, Steffi Werler1, Katharina Koerner1,
Joerg Stypmann2, Michael Kuhlmann3, Richard Holtmeier3,
Michael Zitzmann4, Frank Tuettelmann5, Joerg Gromoll1 &
Joachim Wistuba1
1Institute of Reproductive and Regenerative Biology, Centre of Reproduc-
tive Medicine and Andrology, University of Muenster, Muenster, NRW,
Germany;2Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of
Muenster, Muenster, NRW, Germany;3European Institute for Molecular
Imaging, University of Muenster, Muenster, NRW, Germany;4Department
of Clinical Andrology, Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology,
University of Muenster, Muenster, NRW, Germany;5Institute of Human
Genetics, University of Muenster, Muenster, NRW, Germany.
Intratesticular testosterone levels in Klinefelter syndrome (KS) are comparable to
controls and Leydig cell function was proven to be normal at least in vitro,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
testicular  vascularization  changes  came  into  focus  as  a  potential  factor
contributing  to  hypogonadism.  We  performed  enhanced  ultrasound  based
analysis of the testicular blood support in our
41,XXY* mice. Adult male
41,XXY* (nZ5) and control mice (nZ6) underwent ultrasound analyses with the
Non-Targeted Contrast Agent Vevo MicroMarker. The agent containing gas filled
micro-bubbles was administered intravenously (lower body perfusion). After
initial perfusion, micro-bubbles were destroyed by high ultrasound pressure and
the reperfusion period was analysed. In parallel, electrocardiograms (ECGs) were
taken. Afterwards mice were sacrificed and testes removed for histological
analysis of vascularization. Whilst ECGs did not reveal differences in heart
function, the reperfusion time for testes was significantly increased in 41,XXY
mice (XXY* 28.8G1.7 s; XY* 19.9G2.8 s). Testes of 41,XXY* mice (XXY*
4.6G0.10 mm2; XY* 11.1G0.34 mm2) and the area covered by blood vessels
(XXY* 0.025G0.003 mm2; XY* 0.040G0.002 mm2) were significantly smaller.
Testicular bIood vessel areas of adult males were assigned to four categories
(IZ!80 mm2, IIZ80-1000 mm2, IIIZ1000-5062 mm2, IVZO5062 mm2). The
blood vessel area of categories I and II was significantly decreased in 41,XXY*
mice (P!0.0001). Taking the testis area into account, the area covered by vessels
of category II and III is significantly elevated in KS mice. Blood vessels of
category IV were missing in KS testes. These functional and morphological data
strengthen the assumption that the observation made previously contributes to the
endocrine phenotype seen in KS pointing to an affected vascular system in the
disturbed testicular tissue of males with supernumerary X.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP711
EP712
The role of dopamine pathway on human sperm: in vitro effect of
dopamine receptor agonists and antagonists on sperm motility, kinetics
and viability
Cristina de Angelis1, Federica Cariati4, Giacomo Galdiero2,
Giorgio Coppola2, Mariano Galdiero2, Ciro Salzano2, Claudia Pivonello2,
Roberta Patalano2, Carlo Alviggi3, Giuseppe De Placido3,
Annamaria Colao2 & Rosario Pivonello2
1IOS and Coleman Medicina Futura Medical Centre, Naples, Italy;
2Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Federico II University of
Naples, Naples, Italy;3Dipartimento di Neuroscienze e Scienze Riprodut-
tive ed odontostomatologiche, Federico II University of Naples, Naples,
Italy;4Ceinge - Biotecnologie avanzate, Naples, Italy.
Dopamine has been found in both semen and oviductal fluid and dopamine
receptors
(DRs) have been detected in male genital tract and spermatozoa,
suggesting that dopamine system may control important reproductive functions in
humans. Dopamine improves sperm motility and viability in animal models,
although the underlying molecular mechanisms have not been fully elucidated.
The aims of this study were to investigate DRs expression in human spermatozoa
and to evaluate the in vitro effects of DRs agonists and antagonists on human
sperm  motility,  kinetics  and  viability.  DRs  expression  was  assessed  by
immunofluorescence and western blot in spermatozoa from healthy volunteers
and the effects of D2DR-like agonist cabergoline, D2DR-selective antagonist
L-sulpiride, D4DR-selective agonist PD168,077 and D4DR-selective antagonist
U-101958 on sperm motility, kinetics and viability were tested after 1 hour of
treatment with serial doses of compounds. Sperm motility and kinetics were
analyzed by Sperm Class Analyzer [SCA] 5.0, sperm viability was assessed by
Vital Stain Dye. D2DR and D4DR are both expressed in human spermatozoa.
Cabergoline  significantly  increased  rapid  progressive  motile  spermatozoa
(RPMS) and decreased non motile spermatozoa (NMS). L-sulpiride showed
opposite, although not significant, effects on sperm motility. PD168,077 and
U-101958 did not significantly change sperm motility. Moreover, L-sulpiride
significantly decreased curvilinear velocity (VCL) and increased wobble (WOB).
All tested compounds did not affect sperm viability. Both cabergoline and
PD168,077 induced Akt phosphorylation, compared to untreated spermatozoa.
The results of the current study demonstrated that dopamine pathway may be
involved in the modulation of human sperm motility and kinetic parameters,
without affecting sperm viability, and that Akt could be regarded as a putative
mediator; however, further experiments are being performed to identify the
molecular mechanisms driving these effects.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP712
EP713
An audit on evaluation and management of men with hypogonado-
trophic hypogonadism in a district general hospital in South-Wales
Khaliq Hamdan, Stephen Davies & Atul Kalhan
Royal Glamorgan Hospital, Llantrisant, UK.
Introduction
The current Endocrine Society guidelines (2010) recommend biochemical and
radiological evaluation of men with HH to ascertain underlying hypothalamic
and/or pituitary aetiology although the cost-effectiveness of this strategy is yet to
be  established.  We  did  a  retrospective  audit  to  ascertain  epidemiology,
management and diagnostic outcomes for men with HH in our hospital practice
against the current Endocrine society guidelines.
Methods
A total of 126 men with biochemistry consistent with HH were identified for the
audit period from 2013-2015. Retrospective evaluation of these patients was done
using a  local  electronic  database
(Myrddin)  to  retrieve  relevant  clinical
information.
Results
The commonest symptoms in men with HH included erectile dysfunction (56%),
reduced  libido
(23%),  lethargy
(15%)  and  excessive  sweating
(!10%).  A
significant proportion of men (36%) with HH were overweight (BMIO30) and/or
had  diabetes  mellitus
(25%).  Biochemical  abnormalities  including  a  raised
prolactin, secondary hypothyroidism and abnormal IGF1 levels were noticed in
15%, 15.8% and 4.8% patients respectively. Pituitary imaging was carried out in
67 out of the total 126 patients (53.1%). Radiological abnormalities including
macroadenoma (nZ10), microadenoma (nZ1), empty sella (nZ5), and non-
specific cyst (nZ1) were identified in 25.4% of the scans. Although, none of the
men with a BMIO30 (along with no clinical/biochemical features of pituitary
dysfunction) had any pituitary tumor detected on radiology.
Discussion/Conclusion
There has been an increase in number of referrals to endocrine centres for men
with secondary hypogonadism related to global pandemic of obesity and diabetes
mellitus. The majority of men with increased BMI (without clinical/biochemical
features  of  anterior  pituitary  dysfunction)  do  not  routinely  warrant  further
radiological investigations. This is especially important in context of higher
statistical probability of detecting an incidental pituitary lesion (adenoma or
empty sella) leading to an increased health-economic burden. There is a need for
larger multi-centric studies to reassess BMI related cut offs for further evaluation
of men with HH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP713
EP714
Positive effect of FSH therapy on quantitative and functional sperm
parameters in idiopathic infertile men
Csilla Krausz, Elena Casamonti, Sabrina Vinci, Maria Grazia Fino,
Sara Brilli, Francesco Lotti & Emmanuele Serra
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) therapy is a potential treatment option in
idiopathic infertile men with normal FSH levels. In fact, a recent Cochrane meta-
analysis showed that FSH treatment of men affected by idiopathic oligozoos-
permia significantly improves pregnancy rate. Hyaluronic acid (HA) binding
capacity of spermatozoa is considered a marker of functional competency,
consequently the evaluation of the percentage of HA bound spermatozoa in the
ejaculate can serve as a proxy of sperm fertilizing potential.
Aim
1) to study the effect of HP-FSH treatment on routine sperm parameters and on
HA binding capacity of spermatozoa; 2) to evaluate the effect of FSHb promoter
variant in FSH responsiveness
Materials and methods
Thirty five idiopathic oligo- or asthenozoospermic men were included in the study
with FSH!8 mU/ml. After routine sperm analysis, HA Binding assay have been
performed by using coated slides with HA before, 1 and 3 months intra-therapy
and after 4 months of wash out from the therapy. FSHb promoter -211GOT was
analyzed by Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP).
Results
After 3 months of HP-FSH treatment we observed a significant increase of the
Total Motile Sperm Number (TMSN) (16.8G19.4 vs 31.1G26.7; PZ0,000).
53% of patients resulted “responders“ (defined as an increase greater than the
physiological  oscillation)  for  TMSN. Similarly, the  mean
% of  HA-bound
spermatozoa showed a significant increase after one month (29.6%G13.6 vs
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
41.2%G19.7; PZ0,000); 46% and 61% of patients resulted “responder“ with an
average of two fold increase after 1 and 3 months, respectively. Although the
distribution of the allelic frequencies of FSHB-211 between “responders” and
“non-responders” did not result statistically different neither for HBA nor for
TMSN, we observed a 100% responsiveness for TMSN in T/T genotype carriers.
Conclusion
Our study confirms that FSH therapy may improves spermatogenesis, both
quantitatively and qualitatively in 53-61% of cases. For the first time, we report
data showing a significant positive effect of FSH on a functional parameter, such
as  sperm  HA  binding  already  at
1 month  i.e.  during  the  phase  called
“spermiogenesis”.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP714
EP715
Association between low testosterone and graft dysfunction early after
heart transplantation: results from cross-sectional study
Gregor Poglajen1, Mojca Jensterle2, Andrej Janez2 & Bojan Vrtovec1
1Department of Cardiology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia;2Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolic Diseases, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
Introduction
An inverse relation was found between testosterone and vasculopathy of the
allograft in heart-transplanted men. We evaluated the correlation between serum
testosterone levels and graft function early after heart transplantation.
Methods
In  a  cross-sectional  study  serum  total  testosterone  levels  prior  to  hospital
discharge (19G3 postoperative day) was determined in 49 consecutive male
patients  who  underwent  heart  transplantation  between
2009
and
2013.
Assessment of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), tricuspid annular plane
systolic  excursion
(TAPSE)  and  left  ventricular  hypertrophy
(LVH)  by
echocardiography was performed in all subjects. Low serum testosterone was
defined as !11 nmol/L. LVH was defined as left ventricular wall thickness
O1.1 cm. All patients received standard immunoinduction and maintenance
immunosupression therapy.
Results
Low testosterone was present in 21 (43%) (Group A), and normal in 27 (57%)
patients (Group B). The prevalence of osteoporosis was signifitancly higher in
Group A compared to Group B (90% vs 60%, PZ0.02). The two groups did not
differ in age (58.7G7.2 years in Group A vs. 54.3G11.9 years in Group B), the
presence of renal dysfunction, arterial hypertension, diabetes or hyperlipidemia,
time of hospital discharge, donor age and allograft ischemic time. Both groups
had comparable mean tacrolimus through levels, dose of mycophenolate and
metylprednisolone.  However,  before  discharge,  patients  in  Group  A  had
significantly lower LVEF (60G4.8% vs. 63.3G5.8% vs. Group B, PZ0.04)
and TAPSE (1.3G0.3 cm vs. 1.6G0.3 cm in Group B, PZ0.03). The prevalence
of LVH did not differ between the two groups. Before discharge, more patients in
Group A were found to have low grade rejection (15% vs. 0% in Group B;
PZ0.03).
Conclusion
Low  testosterone  appear  to  be  associated  with  inferior  graft  function  and
increased incidence of rejection early after heart transplantation. Immunomodu-
latory role of testosterone remains to be further elucidated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP715
EP716
The investigation of oxidative stress-related parameters in congenital
hypogonadism
Cem Haymana1, Aydogan Aydogdu1, Bugra Soykut2, Onur Erdem2,
Tural Ibrahimov1, Mustafa Dinc1, Coskun Meric1, Abdullah Taslipinar1,
Yalcin Basaran1, Alper Sonmez1 & Omer Azal1
1Deparment of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Gulhane School of
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Pharmaceutical Toxicology,
Gulhane School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Patients with hypogonadism are at increased risk of cardiac and metabolic
diseases. The pathogenesis of increased cardio-metabolic risk in hypogonadal
patients is not clear. Oxidative stress plays an important role in the pathogenesis
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
of cardio-metabolic diseases. The aim of this study was to search for any
difference  of  the  oxidative  stress  parameters  between  in  patients  with
hypogonadism and healthy controls.
Materials and Methods
Thirty eight male patients with congenital hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
(CHH) (mean age 21.7G1.6 years) and 44 body mass index (BMI) matched
healthy  male  subjects
(mean  age
22.3G1.4
years)  were  enrolled.  The
demographic parameters, homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR)  and  oxidative  stress  parameters  such  as  superoxide  dismutase
(SOD), catalase, glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and malondialdehyde (MDA)
were measured in patients and healthy controls.
Results
When compared to the healthy controls, triglycerides (pZ0.02), insulin, HOMA-
IR, catalase and MDA levels (PZ!0.001 for all) were significantly higher, and
the HDL cholesterol (PZ0.04), total testosterone, FSH, LH and GPx levels
(PZ!0.001 for all) were significantly lower in patients with CHH. There were
significant correlations between the total testosterone levels and catalase (rZK
0.33 PZ0.01), GPx (rZ0.36 PZ0.007) and MDA (rZK0.47 P!0.001) levels.
Conclusions
The results of this study show that young and treatment naïve patients with
hypogonadism have increased oxidative stress related parameters such as serum
catalase and MDA levels. There is significant correlation between oxidative stress
parameters and testosterone levels. Prospective, randomized, controlled studies
with larger number of cases are needed to prove the relationship between
oxidative stress and increased cardio-metabolic risk in hypogonadism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP716
EP717
Delay in the onset of male puberty: role of mutations in luteinizing
hormone-beta gene
Ghazala Shaheen1, Maleeha Akram1, Qiaser Mansoor2, Muhammad Ismail2,
Osama Ishtiaq3, Sarwat Jahan4, Afzaal Ahmed Naseem1, Mazhar Qayyum1
& Syed Shakeel Raza Rizvi1
1Department of Zoology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University
Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan;2Institute of Biomedical and Genetic
Engineering, (IBGE), Islamabad, Pakistan;3Department of Endocrinology,
Shifa International Hospital, Islamabad, Pakistan;4Department of Animal
Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
The reawakening of hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal axis at puberty is influenced
by a number of hormonal and genetic factors along with certain environmental
cues.  In  boys,  puberty  is  initiated  at  around
9
years  of  age  as  plasma
concentrations  of  luteinizing  hormone
(LH),  follicle  stimulating  hormone
(FSH) and testosterone (T) begin to rise leading to development of secondary
sex characteristics. The absence of signs of sexual maturation at the age of 14/15
years is regarded as delayed puberty. One of the main causes of delay in puberty is
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH), characterized by low LH, FSH and T
secretion,  resulting  in  absent  or  impaired  sexual  development.  This  study
examined the endocrine and genetic basis of pubertal delay in boys. Blood
samples were obtained from 30 boys of delayed pubertal development and 30 age
matched controls. The plasma concentration of growth hormone (GH), LH, FSH
and T were determined using ELISA. Based on low plasma concentrations of GH,
LH,  FSH  and  T,  genetic  analysis was  performed  for  determining  possible
mutations in TACR3 and LH-b genes. TACR3 is expressed in the hypothalamus,
whereas LH-b is synthesized by pituitary gonadotropes. One mutation, H148L, of
TACR3 and two mutations, G56D and G122S, of LH-b were screened. DNA was
extracted from blood samples of both groups by organic method, primers of exons
of TACR3 and LH-b splice sites were designed and PCR-RFLP method was
employed for analysis. The mutations H148L of TACR3 and G56D of LH-b were
not found in any group, whereas the PCR product of LH-b digested by enzyme
Eco01091 gave bands of 3 different genotypes in HH boys, GG (93.33%), GA
(3.33%) and AA (3.33%). Thus, one heterozygous G122S mutation in one and
one  homozygous  G122S  mutation  in another  patient  were  identified. In
conclusion, homozygous G122S mutation may cause pubertal delay in our
local population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP717
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP718
Is Testosterone (T) treatment safe and effective in men with HIV
infection? A meta-analysis
Daniele Santi1, Giovanni Guaraldi3, Giovanni Corona2 &
Vincenzo Rochira1
1Unit of Endocrinology, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia and Azienda USL of
Modena, Modena, Italy,2Endocrinology Unit, Medical Department,
Azienda USL of Bologna, Maggiore-Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy;
3Metabolic Clinic, Infectious and Tropical Disease Unit, Department of
Medical and Surgical Sciences for Adults and Children, Clinic of Infectious
Diseases, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
Background
Prevalence of hypogonadism is high (30%) in men with HIV. In these patients T
treatment (TT) is currently used mainly to counteract wasting syndrome and/or
HIV-related lipodystrophy, irrespective of patients’ serum T. However, its effect
and safety in HIV-infected men is still not completely known.
Aim
To investigate both beneficial and adverse effects related to TT in HIV-infected
men using a meta-analytic approach.
Methods
An  extensive  MEDLINE  search  was  performed  using  ‘PubMed’  with  the
following key-words: ‘HIV’ and: ’hypogonadism’, ‘TT’, ‘T’, ’androgens’ or ‘sex
steroids’ from 1946 to April 2015. Meta-analysis included 19 placebo-controlled-
clinical trials evaluating TT in HIV patients and was conducted according to
PRISMA statement using RevMan.
Results
All 19 trials evaluated the effect of TT on body weight on a total of 952 subjects
(TT group: 557; placebo group: 395). Patients’ gonadal status was often not
reported and most of patients were presumably eugonadal. All data are shown as
standardized mean and Confidence Interval (CI). TT significantly improved total
lean body mass (1.44 [0.82-2.07], P!0.001), total body weight (0.99 [0.25-1.72],
PZ0.008) and fat free mass (1.48 [0.85-2.12], P!0.001). This improvement
is characterized by higher heterogeneity (I2Z84%, 88%, and 60%, respectively).
Conversely,  no  beneficial  effects  were  seen  on  total  fat  mass
(K0.17
[K1.58-1.25], PZ0.820). TT was associated with an increased incidence of
minor adverse events (ORZ1.50[1.11-2.01], PZ0.008) and increased mean
serum PSA (0.10 ng/mL, [0.03-0.17], PZ0.007). No change in hemoglobin
(0.39 g/dL, [K0.29-1.07], PZ0.260) was seen.
Conclusions
Our study suggests that TT in HIV-infected men is effective in improving body
composition (increase in lean body mass), although the incidence of general
adverse events is higher than in the placebo group. However, studies show a
highest variability and the real benefits of TT in HIV-infected men remains still to
be established.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP718
EP719
Aluminium oxide nanoparticles-induced spermatotoxicity, oxidative
stress and changes in reproductive hormones and testes histopathology
in male rats: Possible protective effect of glutathione
Mokhtar Ibrahim Yousef1, Thanaa I. Shalaby2 & Adil A. Kareem1
1Department of Environmental Studies, Institute of Graduate Studies and
Research, Alexandria University, 163 Horreya Avenue, Chatby 21526, P.O.
Box 832, Alexandria, Egypt;2Department of Medical Biophysics, Medical
Research Institute, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt.
There is a rising use of Aluminium oxide nanoparticles (Al2O3NPs) in many
branches of industry and personal care products. Because of these uses, their
impact on the environment must be considered and investigated. Almost nothing
is known about the effects of Al2O3NPs on semen quality and reproductive
hormones. Possible mechanisms for the cytotoxicity of Al2O3NPs are still being
discussed, but oxidative stress may be responsible for their effect. Therefore,
the objective of this study was thus to know the capability of glutathione as
antioxidant  agent  against  the  effects  of  Al2O3NPs  on  sperm  parameters,
testosterone, FSH, LH, steroid enzymes, histological changes, lipid peroxidation
and antioxidant enzymes in male rats. Animals were divided into four groups,
group 1 was used as control, group 2 was treated  orally with glutathione
(100 mg/kg BW), group 3 was treated intraperitoneally (IP) with aluminum oxide
nanoparticles (70 mg/kg BW; !50 nm), group 4 was treated with aluminum
oxide nanoparticles plus glutathione. Rats were administered their respective
doses every day for 77 day. Results showed that Al2O3NPs decreased final body
weight, body weight gain, relative testes and epididymis weights, sperm count,
sperm motility, testosterone levels, 17- ketosteroid reductase, while increased
abnormal  sperm,  follicle  stimulating  hormone,  luteinizing  hormone,
17b-
hydroxysteroid  dehydrogenase  and  weight  of  prostate  gland.  In  addition,
Al2O3NPs decreased the activities of antioxidant enzymes (GST, CAT, SOD,
GPx) and reduced glutathione, while increased the levels of thiobarbituric acid
reactive substances (TBARS) in both plasma and testes. Histological examination
of testes showed that Al2O3NPs caused decrease in the number of spermatogenic
cells  in  the  seminiferous  tubules,  degeneration  of  germinal  epithelium,
disappearance in primary spermatogonia and round spermatid. The presence of
glutathione with Al2O3NPs minimized its effect which improved the structural
components of the testes and spermatogenic cells. The present data concluded that
glutathione could be used as protective agents against the reproductive toxicity
induced by Al2O3NPs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP719
EP720
Adjustment of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone reference intervals
to the male Portuguese population
Joana Simo˜ es-Pereira, Susana Prazeres, Daniel Macedo, Margarida Silva-
Vieira, Pedro Marques & Maria Concei
¸a˜o Pereira
Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa, Francisco Gentil, Lisbon,
Portugal.
Introduction
In our practice we’ve been following some oncologic survivors patients with low-
low/normal levels of testosterone who are asymptomatic. Aims: to determine the
levels of total (TT) and free testosterones (FT) and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in
healthy  men,  in  order  to  find  the  reference  intervals
(RI)  adjusted  to  our
population and compare them with those provided by the kit-producers (KP).
Methods
We collected blood samples from 125 healthy male blood-donors and determined,
for each man, the levels of TT, FT and DHT. Age groups: A-21-30-years: 20
men; B-31-40-years 34 men; C-41-50-years: 34 men; D-51-60-years: 25 men;
E-61-70-years: 12 men. In these assays we used Immulite2000, Free TESTO-
RIA-CT and Dihydrotestosterone RIA for TT, FT and DHT, respectively. RIs
were calculated through meanG2 S.D., being the RI described as K2 S.D.-C2 S.D.
Results
TT (ng/dl)
FT (pg/ml)
DHT (pg/ml)
RI
RI
RI
Age group   Calculated
KP
Calculated
KP
Calculated
KP
A
247-635
160-726
4.9-14.9
8.9-42.5
149-395
169-692
B
137-562
4.0-13.3
120-386
163-597
C
120-482
3.9-11.3
6.6-30
109-349
77-K440
D
104-478
129-767
2.8-9.3
64-306
93-413
E
2.8-8.6
4.9-21.6
61-281
Conclusion
The RI that we determined are inferior and narrower than those provided by the
KP. We highlight the need to verify if the RI provided are adjusted to our
population’s  reality.  It  would  also  be  important  to  include  the  paediatric
population in next studies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP720
EP721
Is testosterone deficiency a real problem of male IBD patients?
Jana Kollerova, Tibor Hlavaty, Anna Krajcovicova, Zuzana Leskova,
Tomas Koller & Juraj Payer
5th Department of Internal Medicine, Comenius University Faculty of
Medicine and University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia.
There have been many discussions about testosterone role in inflammation and
autoimmunity. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic autoimmune
disease in younger age groups. The aim ouf our study was to evaluate testosterone
concentration and it’s influence on disease acitivity and the quality of life.
In our cross-sectional study we measured total testosterone levels in males with
IBD (Crohn’s Disease, Ulcerative colitis). Age, BMI, main characteristics of IBD
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
were also recorded as well as the disease activity (Harvey-Bradshaw Index for CD
and Mayo score for UC) and the quality of life (SIBDQ).
We included 113 patient with IBD (CD 66, UC 47) with median age of 34 (CD)
and 41 (UC) years. Disease was active in 10.6% of CD and 14.9% UC patients.
Median duration of disease was 10.05 and 8.9 years respectively. The median
testosterone concentration was 11 nmol/l for both groups. The level was less than
10 nmol/l in 34% and lower than 6 nmol/l in 4% of patients. We found a slight
negative  correlation  of  testosterone  with  disease  activity  in  UC
(RZ0.28,
PZ0.06) and slight negative correlation to CRP in all IBD patients (RZ0.2,
PZ0.03).  There  was  also  negative  correlation  between  IBD  duration  and
testosterone (RZ0.18, PZ0.058). The quality of life did not correlate with TST
levels.
Testosterone deficiency in quite common among male IBD patients. It seems to be
connected to the disease activity, inflammation and the duration of disease. Very
low concentration of testosterone was rarely found. The quality of life seemed not
to be affected while most cases were in the clinical remission.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP721
EP722
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism - clinical spectrum: from sporadic to
familiar forms
Ana Saavedra1,2, Elisabete Rodrigues1,2, Manuel Lemos3 &
Davide Carvalho1,2
1
Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro Hospitalar
de Sa˜o João, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal;3Health Sciences Research Centre (CICS-UBI) Faculty of
Health Sciences University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal.
Introduction
Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) is a rare disorder. It can be
sporadic or familiar and is divided into anosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
(Kallmann syndrome - KS) and congenital normosmic isolated hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism (idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism - IHH). A growing
number of genes are involved in its etiology, suggesting the heterogeneity and
complexity of this condition.
Cases Reports
Six cases of CHH are presented - 3 KS and 3 IHH cases. All KS patients were
male and the diagnosis was suspected by pubertal delay (sparse hairbody and
small testicles/penis for age) when they aged 13 years (one patient) and 18 years
old (two patients). Smell was tested by ORL: two of them had anosmia and one
had hyposmia. One patient also had bilateral deafness, congenital cardiomyo-
pathy, cognitive impairment and thyroid papillary carcinoma. Its CT revealed
vermis hypoplasia and an enlarged sixth ventricle. Olfactory bulbs were absent in
the two other patient’s MRI. Two of 3 IHH cases represented a familiar form
(being sister and brother), while the other case occurred as a sporadic condition in
a male patient (detected at 28 years old because of ginecomastia with no other
symptoms). The female patient with familiar IHH was diagnosed at 18 years
because of primary amenorrhea (karyotye 46,XX) and her brother was diagnosed
at 22 years old because of pubertal delay. Both patients had positive genetic test
and shared the same mutation. Genetic test (KAL1, FGF1 and GnRHR genes) was
negative in other 3 patients and still is in progress for one KS patient.
Conclusion
Although the cases presented share the main manifestations of CHH, each one has
specific characteristics demonstrating the heterogeneity of this condition. They
also highlight how diagnosis can be challenging and sometimes delayed to adult
age, because distinction from constitutional delay of puberty may be difficult.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP722
EP723
Garcinia cambogia modulates ciprofloxacin-induced testicular histo-
pathology through regulatory effects on the pituitary hormones
Victor Ukwenya1 & Oladayo Oladiran2
1Ekiti State University, Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria;2Edinburgh University,
Edinburgh, UK.
Introduction
Garcinia cambogia is a plant with reported spermatogenic properties. ciprofloxcin
is an antibiotic used in the treatment of of various bacterial infection but with
reported toxic effects on the testes. The modulatory effects of Garcinia cambogia
on ciprofloxacin-induced testicular toxicity was evaluated in this study.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Method
Twenty one (21) male Wistar rats were randomly divided into four (4) groups.
Group A was given ciprofloxacin 150 mg/kg only, Group B was given 150 mg/kg
ciprofloxacin and 400 mg/kg Garcinia cambogia, Group C was administered
400 mg/kg  Garcinia  cambogia  only  while  Group  D  served  as  the  normal
control group and received 1.5 ml of distilled water (placebo). Administration
lasted for 30 days and thereafter the animals were sacrificed; blood samples were
collected for hormonal studies; and the testes harvested and processed for
histological studies.
Results
Findings obtained showed significantly reduced concentration of luteinising and
follicle stimulating hormones in ciprofloxacin-treated group compared to the
Garcinia cambogia-treated and control groups at P!0.05. The concentration of
testosterone in ciprofloxacin C Garcinia cambogia-treated group was signi-
ficantly higher than in the ciprofloxacin-treated group. Histological analysis
revealed improved seminiferous tubule architecture in Garcinia cambogia treated
rats compared to the ciprofloxacin-treated group.
Conclusion
The results show that Garcinia cambogia extract has spermatogenic properties
mediated through its influence on pituitary hormones, thereby ameliorating
ciprofloxacin-induced testicular toxicity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP723
EP724
Association of follicle stimulating hormone receptor single nucleotide
polymorphisms with fertility in greek men
Damianos Tsitlakidis1,2, Theodora Katopodi1, Dimitrios Goulis1,
Ioannis Papadimas1 & Aristeidis Kritis1
1Medical School, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki,
Greece;2Universitat Klinikum Jena, Jena, Germany.
Background and Objective
Although several epidemiological studies have been conducted, the impact of
Follicle  Stimulating  Hormone  Receptor
(FSHR)  polymorphisms  on  male
infertility remains unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence
of  specific  FSHR  Single  Nucleotide  Polymorphisms
(SNPs)  in  the  Greek
population and associate the latter with the clinical phenotype.
Patients and Methods
We  enrolled 96 subjects: men  with idiopathic non-obstructive azoospermia
(nZ78) were compared with a control group with fertile men (nZ18) for SNPs in
FSHR positions K29, 307, 566 and 680. The SNP in position 566 was assessed
by  polymerase  chain  reaction  restriction  fragment  length  polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP) and the other three SNPs’ (K29, 307, 680) with Single Strand
Conformation Polymorphism (SSCP); all of them were validated with DNA
sequence.
Results
No SNPs were detected in positions K29 and 307. The heterozygous SNP (AG) at
position 680 was associated with different size of the right testis (PZ0.080).
There was no association between the 566 SNPs polymorphism and hormonal or
semen  parameters.  The  combination  SNP
680  AA  with  566  CT  revealed
significant association with FSH and LH concentrations.
Conclusions
In our study group, FSHR SNPs at positions K29, 307, 566 and 680 do not appear
to play specific roles in male infertility. Larger studies may be needed to confirm
these results.
FSH Receptor, FSHR, SNP, Polymorphism, male infertility, fertility.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP724
EP725
Clinical and metabolic profile of male-to-female transgenders in
Zamboanga Peninsula
Alex Pang & Jerome Barrera
Zamboanga City Medical Center, Zamboanga City, The Philippines.
Introduction
The effect of self-prescribed cross-sex hormone therapy on Male-to-Female
(MtF) transgenders do not appear to have been well investigated and can be
associated with potential serious longterm complications. The main purpose of
this study is to look at the clinical and metabolic profile, and cardiovascular
outcomes of MtF transgenders in Zamboanga Peninsula.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Methodology
This is a cross-sectional study, done to determine the clinical and metabolic profile
of Zamboanga-based MtF transgenders on either self-prescribed or on supervised
cross-sex hormone therapy. Demographic and biochemical characteristics were
taken as well as feminizing effects and cardiovascular outcomes (e.g. hypertention)
were also documented 30 study participants aged 18 years and above.
Results
All respondents reported self-prescribed practices on cross-sex hormone therapy.
Oral  contraceptives  pills
(OCP)  containing  Ethinyl  Estradiol
30 mg  C
Levonorgestrel 125 mg C Fe 75 mg was the most common hormone drug used
based on recommendations by respondents’ friends (100%). Most respondents got
their OCPs from pharmacies (60%) and public health centers (13%). Common
side effects were decreased libido (100%), Breast pain (93%), acne (20%), mood
swings (17%) and headaches (10%). Breast enlargement (100%), decreased
morning erection (100%), decreased muscle mass (76%), smoother skin (70%),
weight gain (66%) and change in voice (10%) were observed. Clinical profile of
the study participant showed that 36% were overweight and 6.67% were obese,
60-70% were pre-hypertensive, and 10% have Hypertension. Metabolic profile
revealed that respondents were in the pre-diabetics range (FBS 16%, 2 h 75
OGTT 40%, HbA1c 73%) and lipid profile showed 20% have borderline high
LDL result and 3% have low HDL.
Conclusion
The result of this study showed that majority of MtF transgenders in Zamboanga
peninsula not only self-prescribed cross-sex hormone, they tailor-make their own
drug dose and administration on the basis of suggestions from friends who are not
trained to do so. At least half of them experienced the desired feminization effects
of the hormones. Impaired fasting glucose, elevated blood pressure and weight,
and abnormalities in the lipid profile were common among the transgenders.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP725
EP726
Should we initially manage young males with Kallmann’s syndroma by
stimulation treatment until the freezing and storage of sperm?
Dragan Tesic1, Milena Mitrovic1, Radoslav Pejin1, Djordje Popovic1,
Bojan Vukovic1 & Jovan Vlaski2
1Clinic of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Disturbances, KC of
Vojvodina in Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia;2Department of Pediatrics, KC of
Vojvodina in Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
Introduction
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism(HH) is mandatory treated with testosterone (T).
However, gonadotropin(hCG/FSH) administration might be the challenging optimal
therapy.
Case 1
Male, 23-y-old, hypophisectomy pp. adenoma hromophobum, one month later-
FSH 1.5 U/L, LH 0.55 U/L. Primogonyl(hCG) test; testosteronemia: 0 day 0.069,
3 day 19.01 nmol/l. After 5 m in ejaculate no sperm. 5 m after introduction of hCG
twice weekly 1,500 i.u. and FSHCLH 150 i.u. tree times weekly sperm reappeared,
22!106/mL (testicular volume normal). On testosteron parenterally, after 6 m,
sperm 3!106/mL. Mood stable.
Case 2
Male, 19-y-old with anosmia- Sy Kallmann(KS), BH 182 cm, BW 85kg, sexual
development (Tanner stages): genitals stage 2, testes 1.5 cm (on ultrasonography),
penis 2 cm, breast size stage 3 (for female), pubic hair density- stage 2, with few
darker  hairs  at  base  of  penis.  Reduced  sex  steroids  with  absent  body  hair
distribution, cariotip 46 XY. LHRH test; FSH: 0’ 0.81, 30 min. 3.27 U/L, LH 0’
0.15, 30 min. 2.81 U/L. hCG test; testosteron: 0 day 1.32, 3 day 2.81 nmol/L. After
hCG  3!3000 i.u./week, testosterone  13.9 nmol/l, gynaecomasthia  almost  dis-
appeared, male body shape, penis longer and widened, pubic hare- stage 5/6, new
found sexuality but testes almost without change in size. Still changes in mood, but
physically feeling well-being.
Case 3
Male, 26-year-old, KS, similar phenotype as Case 2. Libido and erection (penis 2.5
cm) present but without ejaculation. After hCG 3000j./2-3day he started with
ejaculation, voice deeper, libido increased. In 33y. hCG and HMG administered.
After 2m. in ejaculate sperm was detected 0.5!106/mL, after 4 month sperm
3!106/mL, and testicular growth was 4!2 cm. Patient with postive mood and
after 5 m of tretment, with spem 4.2-9.2!106/mL, sperm frozen in storage tank
containing liquid nitrogen.
Conclusion
Patients with HH should be treated until testes become enlarged and sperm
conformed in ejaculate, initially. Beside eliminating psychosocial impact of small
testes safety reasons (e.g. possible allergy on gonadotropins) should indicate the
storage of a sperm before chronic testosteron therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP726
EP727
The Etiology of Azoospermia
Samia Ould Kablia & Malek Iabassen
Central Hospital of the Army, Algiers, Algeria.
Introduction
Azoospermia is identified in approximately 1% of all men and in 10 to 15% of
infertile males. A precise diagnosis of azoospermia and systematic evaluation of
the patient to establish the disease etiology are needed to guide appropriate
management options. The development  of  intracytoplasmic sperm  injection
(ICSI) as an efficient therapy for severe male factor infertility has become an
appropriate treatment for the majority of male reproductive tract deficiencies.
Objectives
The aim of this study was to evaluate the hormonal profile and the etiology of non
obstructive azoospermic men.
Materials
We conducted a prospective study from 2014 to 2015. Twenty four azoospermic
patients were screened for medical history, physical exam, measurements of
serum total testosterone and FSH, PRL, sperm analysis, genetic testing, and
sometimes MRI.
Results
The mean age of our patients was 36.13 years. The FSH was high in 13 cases: four
cases of cryptorchidism, one case of microdeletion AZFc, one case of thalassemia
one case was a cook, and 2 cases work in radar. For the five remaining no etiology
was found. The FSH was low in 4 cases: two adenoma, one hypogonadotrophic
hypogonadism and one probably mutation of the FSH gene. Finally the FSH was
in normal range in 7 cases: one case of empty sellae, one hyperprolactinoma, one
cryptorchidism and one 47 XYY male syndrome.
Conclusion
In the past, men with azoospermia were classified as infertile, and a sperm donor
was initially considered one of the best options for conceiving. Currently, the
knowledge that many causes of azoospermia can be reversed is admitted from the
medical profession. Therapeutic perspective as testicular sperm extraction and
ICSI have changed the prognosis of azoospermia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP727
Neuroendocrinology
EP728
Women with idiopathic intracranial hypertension have a distinct
andro-metabolic signature compared to polycystic ovary syndrome
and simple obesity
Punith Kempegowda1,3, Michael O’Reilly1,3, Catherine Hornby1,2,
Hannah Botfield1,2, Angela Taylor1,3, Beverley Hughes1,3,
Jeremy Tomlinson4, Wiebke Arlt1,3 & Alexandra Sinclair1,2
1Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, Birmingham, UK;
2Neurometabolism, Birmingham, UK;3Centre of Endocrinology, Diabetes
and Metabolism, Birmingham, UK;4Oxford Centre for Diabetes,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Oxford, UK.
Context
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) is characterised by elevated intracranial
pressure and occurs predominantly in obese premenopausal women. Signs and
symptoms of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) often coexist in IIH. Here we
compared the androgenic and metabolic phenotypes in IIH, PCOS and simple
obesity.
Patients and Methods
We studied 25 patients with IIH (mean age 34.4G9.2 years; mean BMI 37.8G
5.2 kg/m2), in comparison to 31 women with PCOS and 15 with simple obesity;
all three groups were matched for age and BMI. Women with IIH were studied
before and after a weight loss intervention (mean BMI change K5.8G3.0 kg/m2).
In all participants we performed comprehensive metabolic phenotyping and
steroid profiling. Serum androgens were measured by liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry); 24-hour urinary steroid excretion was analysed by
gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. Urinary steroid profiles were correlated
with clinical parameters of IIH severity.
Results
Serum testosterone (T) in IIH was comparable to PCOS and significantly higher
than controls (PZ0.01). Serum androstenedione (A) was significantly increased
in PCOS (PZ0.008) but IIH did not differ from controls. Insulin resistance as
assessed by HOMA-IR did not differ between IIH and controls; PCOS women had
a trend  towards  significantly  higher  HOMA-IR  values
(PZ0.08).  Total
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
glucocorticoid excretion was significantly higher in IIH compared to controls
(PZ0.01) and decreased after weight loss (PZ0.02). Similarly, the urinary ratio
of 5a-THF/THF, a marker of systemic 5a-reductase activity, was significantly
increased  in  IIH  compared  to  controls
(PZ0.04). An/Et  ratio  correlated
significantly with baseline markers of ocular papilloedema in IIH (RZ0.47,
PZ0.02).
Conclusion
These results indicate a distinct andro-metabolic signature in IIH, with increased
T but  normal  A  and  HOMA-IR  values.  We  propose  the  new  term  of
“andrometabolic syndrome” that regularly features androgen excess and obesity
and variably presents with additional features such as anovulation (PCOS) and
raised intracranial pressure (IIH).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP728
EP729
The cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor LEE001 (ribuciclib) demon-
strates antiproliferative effects in neuroendocrine tumor cells in vitro
Elke Tatjana Aristizabal Prada, Svenja Nolting, Gerald Spottl, Julian Maurer
& Christoph Auernhammer
Klinikum der Universitat Munchen GEP-NET Center AG Auernhammer,
Munich, Bavaria, Germany.
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are crucial for the cell cycle regulation and
alterations of the cell cycle and its regulators are often observed in human
malignancies. CDK4/6 in particular orchestrates the G1 phase progression and the
G1/S transition. Here we investigated the in vitro effects of the CDK4/6 inhibitor
LEE001(Novartis, Basel) on the human neuroendocrine tumor (NET) cell lines
BON1, QGP1 and NCI-H727. The cells were treated with different concentrations
of LEE001 alone (1 nM to 10 mM) and in combination with 5-fluoruracil (5 mM)
and everolimus RAD001 (10 nM). The cell viability decreased in a time- and
dose-dependent  manner.  The  combinational  treatment  with  everolimus
(RAD001) showed a significant enhancement in inhibition of cell viability
when compared to single treatments in BON1, QGP1 and H727 cells. In contrast,
the combinational treatment with 5-fluoruracil showed significant enhancement
over single substance treatment only in H727. LEE001 showed a time- and dose-
dependent G1 cell cycle arrest in all three cell lines. Western blot analysis showed
that the expression level of cell cycle relevant proteins such as Checkpoint kinase
1
(Chk1), phospho-retinoblastoma (pRb) and CyclinB1/D1/D3 were altered by
LEE001 treatment. Also, a compensatory upregulation of CDK4 in response to
LEE001  treatment  was  observed.  Furthermore,  LEE001  treatment  led  to  a
suppression of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway, as revealed by a decrease in
phosphorylation of Akt and the mTOR target 4E binding protein 1. In summary,
the CDK 4/6 inhibitor LEE001 exhibits promising anti-cancer properties in
human  NET  cell  lines  in  vitro  and  should  be  further  investigated  in
neuroendocrine tumors.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP729
EP730
The oxytocin regulates kidney function through V2 receptor
Jolanta Gutkowska, Eric Plante, Ahmed Menouar, Bogdan Danalache &
Marek Jankowski
CRCHUM, University of Montreal, Montreal, Que, Canada.
During maturation of oxytocin (OT) prohormone, several bioactive intermediate
molecules are formed. The plasma concentrations of these forms (OT-G; OT-GK
and OT-GKR) increase markedly in rat circulation at the end of gestation. At low
concentration in the circulation OT stimulates while OT-GKR inhibits diuresis.
Since OT and OT-GKR show different effects on the urine flow, we hypothesized
that OT-GKR modulates renal action by targeting the V2 receptor.
Results
The 8-weeks-old Wistar rats were injected (i.e.) with vehicle, OT and OT-GKR or
in combinations. OT (10 mmol/kg) increased urine outflow by 40% (P!0.01) and
the sodium excretion by 47% (P!0.01). The treatment with 10 mmol/kg of
OT-GKR decreased diuresis by 50% (P!0.001), decreased sodium by 50%
(P!0.05) and lowered potassium by 42% (P!0.05). OT antagonist (OTA)
reduced diuresis and natriuresis exerted by OT, whereas the anti-diuretic effect of
OT-GKR was unaffected by OTA. The treatment with V2  receptor antagonist
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(V2A) in the presence and absence of OT induced diuresis, sodium and potassium
outflow. The V2A in the presence of OT-GKR only partially increased diuresis
and natriuresis.
Molecular docking showed potent binding energies of OT-GKR to V2R as well as
to OTR. Moreover, the binding affinity of OT-GKR to V2R in renal sections is
almost equivalent to that of AVP. Finally, the cAMP release from CHO cells
overexpressing V2  receptor has been induced by low concentration of AVP
(EC50:4.2e-011), the higher concentration of OT (EC50:3.2e-010) and by very
high concentration of OT-GKR (EC50:1.1e-006). The OT-GKR potentiated
cAMP release when combined with AVP, but blocked cAMP release when
combined with OT.
Conclusions
OT-GKR inhibits diuresis and natriuresis exerted by OT, suggesting an auto-
regulation of the renal function by the OT/OT-GKR system. This led us to the
conclusion that OT-GKR regulates the kidney effects by specific interactions with
V2 receptor.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP730
EP731
Abstract withdrawn.
EP732
Growth hormone increases ALAS2, the rate-limiting enzyme of Hbb in
male rat hippocampus
Marion Walser1, Jan Oscarsson2, Ruth Wickelgren1, Jorgen Isgaard1 &
˚berg1
David 
1The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,
Sweden;2Department of Molecular Pharmacology, AstraZeneca R&D,
Molndal, Sweden.
Objective
Growth hormone (GH) has long been known to have neuroprotective properties.
Hypophysectomy (Hx) completely abolishes circulating endocrine GH. Also
neuronal (non-erythrocyte) haemoglobin beta chain (Hbb) in the hippocampus
decreases following Hx while GH infusions and injections robustly increase the
levels approximately 2-4-fold in male rat hippocampus. Recently it has been
revealed that Hbb protein is present in mitochondria in the mammalian brain.
Current investigations have shown that neuroprotective potential is associated
with mitochondrial function. To investigate the signalling pathway between GH
and Hbb, we measured the transcript levels of delta-aminolevulinate synthase 2
(ALAS2), a mitochondria specific rate-limiting enzyme of the heme synthesis in
the hippocampus of male rats. To further extend our study of the signalling
pathway involved in neuroprotection, we also included ALAS1 and hypoxia-
inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1a) in male rat hippocampus.
Methods & Results
GH was administered as a continuous infusion (GH inf) or as two daily injections
(GHx2) in hx male rats. The response of ALAS2, ALAS1 and HIF1a to GH in the
hippocampus was assessed by Q-RT-PCR. ALAS2 increased 3-fold in the male
hippocampus and there was a significant difference in ALAS1 between Hx and
GHx2 and between HIF1a and untreated hippocampus.
Conclusion
The type of GH administration affects Hbb abundance probably by increasing the
level of ALAS2.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP732
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP733
Impaired innate immunity in Cushing’s syndrome: increase CD14C
CD16CC monocytes
Gloria Aranda Velazquez1,3, Cristina Lopez2, Yaiza Esteban3,
Mireia Mora1,3, Irene Halperin1,3, Gregori Casals4, Joaquim Ensen˜ at5 &
Felicia Alexandra Hanzu1,3
1Endocrinology Department, HCB, Barcelona, Spain;2Citometry Plataform.
IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain;3IDIBAPS-CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain;
4Hormonal Laboratory, HCB, Barcelona, Spain;5Neurosurgery, HCB,
Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction
Chronic hypercortisolism is marked by an increased cardiovascular risk pattern.
Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammation that involves both innate and adaptive
immunity. Glucocorticoids (GC) are immune-suppressors and adrenocortico-
trophic  hormone
(ACTH)  possesses immune-modulatory  activities. GC  and
ACTH may act in atherothrombotic inflammatory pathways.
Aim
To analyze the immune cells pattern in endogenous Cushing syndrome (CS) in
order to investigate their atherovascular risk phenotype and to evaluate the
immune modulator role of ACTH on this pattern.
Material and Methods
26 CS: 16 ACTH dependent (D), 10 ACTH independent (ID) and 12 healthy
controls (C) were included and peripheral immune cells, respectively monocytes
(MN), lymphocytes (L) and neutrophils (N) analyzed by flow cytometry for the
presence  of  cell  surface  activation  markers  previously  associated  with
atherosclerosis.
Results
Leukocytes, N, M, NKL were increased in CS (P*!0.05). Atypical CD14C
CD16CCM were higher in ACTH-ID CS (8.9G3.5%) vs ACTH-D CS (4.2G
1.9%). Other tendencies: CD11bC cells increased in ACTH-ID CS; CD15C,
CD15CCD16C and CD15CCD16C11bCN were higher in CS.
Conclusion
High chronic exposure to GC in CS increase in the absence of the protective
immune-modulator presence  of ACTH the non-classical atherovascular risk
CD14CCD16CC monocytes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP733
EP734
Serum concentrations of glucose, cholesterol and triglyceride in men
with prolactinoma treated with cabergoline
Maria del rocio Dawid1, Karina Arcano1, Juan José Díez1,
Carles Villabona3, Carmen Bernal2 & Pedro Iglesias1
1Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain;2Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid,
Spain;3Hospital Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction
Hyperprolactinemia has been associated with several metabolic abnormalities
both in glucose homeostasis, insulin sensitivity, and in lipid profile. Moreover, it
has also been reported that many of them seem to improve after normalizing
serum prolactin (PRL) concentrations.
Objective
To study serum glucose, cholesterol and triglyceride in men with prolactinoma
before and after chronic treatment with cabergoline.
Patients and Methods
A retrospective study in 27 patients (age 39.1G13.1 years; 20 macroprolacti-
nomas
(74.1%))  was  performed.  Serum  levels  of  glucose,  cholesterol,
triglycerides, PRL, gonadotropins (FSH and LH) and testosterone were quantified
in every patient before and after cabergoline therapy.
Results
Mean serum glucose (94.1G13.4 mg/dl), cholesterol (211.4G41.6 mg/dl) and
triglyceride (132.6G83.9 mg/dl) at prolactinoma diagnosis (PRL 1200 (337-
5507) ng/ml) were normal. Cabergoline therapy (time on therapy 56.9G46.0
months; cumulative dose 108 (49.5-239) mg) achieved a reduction in serum PRL
(16
(2.9-44.2) ng/ml, P!0.001) and an increase in serum testosterone (236.8G
161.4 ng/dl vs 365.8G155.2 ng/dl, PZ0.032) without significant changes in
gonadotropin levels. Cabergoline did not modify serum concentrations of glucose
(94.2G12.3 mg/dl)  and  triglyceride
(128.9G61.2 mg/dl).  However,  it  was
accompanied by a reduction in serum cholesterol, although this decrease did
not reach the level of the statistical significance (198.4G31.9 mg/dl; PZ0.061).
No correlation between serum PRL and testosterone with glucose, cholesterol and
triglyceride at prolactinoma diagnosis or at last clinical visit was found.
Conclusion
Both hyperprolactinemia and its chronic treatment with cabergoline do not
modify glycemic and lipid profile in men with prolactinoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP734
EP735
Phenotype-genotype analysis in patients with GnRH deficiency in a
single center
Sandra Pekic Djurdjevic1,2, Cheng Xu3, Andrew Dwyer3,
Daniele Cassatella3, Mirjana Doknic1,2, Dragana Miljic1,2,
Marko Stojanovic1,2, Milan Petakov1,2, Nelly Pitteloud3 & Vera Popovic1,2
1Department of Neuroendocrinology, Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes
and Diseases of Metabolism, University Clinical Center, Belgrade, Serbia;
2School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;
3Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Sevice of the Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), du Bugnon 46, Lausanne 1011,
Switzerland.
Objective
Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) results from isolated GnRH
deficiency  and  may  present  with  normal  sense  of  smell
(nCHH),  anosmia
(Kallmann syndrome, KS) or in syndromic forms. Genetic defects are identified in
approximately half of CHH cases and oligogenicity is noted in almost 10%.
Further, spontaneous reversal of is seen in 15% of patients.
Methods
We  analyzed  the clinical  characteristics of
37 Serbian  CHH  probands  (34
sporadic, 3 familial). Genetic analyses were conducted in 15 probands. Rare
variants (minor allele frequency !1%) were considered mutations if they were
nonsense, frameshift, splice-site-altering variants or missense variants predicted
to be deleterious in silico.
Results
In total, 11/37 (30%) had KS, 22/37 (59%) were nCHH, and 4 were syndromic
(nZ2  4H syndrome:  HH/hypomyelination/hypodontia, nZ1  CHARGE  syn-
drome:  coloboma/heart  defects/atresia  of  choanae/retarded  growth/genital
anomalies/ear  defects,  nZ1
HHCadrenal  hypoplasia).  Three  male  reversal
cases were noted among the 33 KS/nCHH (10%). Genetic studies revealed
mutations in 11 different loci in 12/15 (80%) unrelated probands. Two of three
reversal cases were found to carry heterozygous mutations (FGFR1 and TACR3
respectively) and all three familial cases (2 nCHH, 1 KS) were found to harbor
heterozygous mutations in FGFR1. Among the syndromic cases, both patients
with 4H Syndrome harbor heterozygous mutations in POLR3 while the patient
with HHCadrenal hypoplasia has a hemizygous mutation in NR0B1. Exome
sequencing revealed oligogenicity in one familial nCHH case (1/11, 10%) who
harbors heterozygous mutations in FGFR1, GNRH1, and LEP.
Conclusions
This CHH cohort displays marked clinical heterogeneity including patients with 4H
syndrome, CHARGE syndrome and congenital adrenal hypoplasia. We identified
mutations in the majority (80%) of cases. Those patients without mutations did not
exhibit any CHH-associated phenotypes. Exome sequencing is an efficient and
effective tool for exploring the complex genetic architecture of CHH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP735
EP736
The medical treatment with pasireotide in Cushing’s disease: an Italian
multicenter experience based on “Real Word Evidence”
Rosario Pivonello1, Giorgio Arnaldi2, Carla Maria Scaroni3,
Carla Giordano4, Salvatore Cannavo5, Davide Iacuaniello1,
Laura Trementino2, Marialuisa Zilio3, Valentina Guarnotta4,
Adriana Albani5, Alessia Cozzolino1, Grazia Michetti2, Marco Boscaro3 &
Annamaria Colao1
1Università Federico II, Naples, Italy;2Ospedali Riuniti di Ancona, Ancona,
Italy;3Università di Padova, Padua, Italy;4A.O.U.P. Paolo Giaccone,
Palermo, Italy;5Università di Messina, Messina, Italy.
A recent phase III clinical trial has demonstrated that the treatment with the
somatostatin analogue pasireotide normalizes cortisol secretion in 15-28% of
patients with Cushing’s disease (CD). The aim of the current study was to
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
evaluate the effectiveness of 6-months pasireotide treatment on clinical and
hormonal profiles in a group of CD patients with mild to moderate disease
according with the real-word evidence. Thirty-two patients with CD unsuccess-
fully treated by surgery and with persistently increased urinary free cortisol
(UFC) levels started pasireotide treatment at the dose of 600 mg bid. UFC, plasma
ACTH and serum cortisol levels were measured every three months together with
clinical and metabolic parameters. Five patients discontinued treatment during the
first 6 months for adverse events, mainly gastrointestinal disturbances; among the
remaining 27 patients, 14 with very mild, 6 with mild, 6 with moderate and 1 with
very severe UFC increase reached 6-months follow-up; the study focused on the
26 patients with very mild to moderate disease. After 6-months pasireotide
treatment, UFC levels were normalized (ULN!1) or nearly normalized (ULN
between 1 and 1.1) in 22 out of 32 (68.7%) patients. A significant decrease of UFC
(PZ0.004),  serum  cortisol
(PZ0.011)  and  ACTH  levels  (PZ0.002)  were
demonstrated in the entire cohort of CD patients. The decrease of UFC levels was
accompanied by a significant decrease in weight (PZ0.000), body mass index
(PZ0.000), waist circumference (PZ0.01) as well as serum total cholesterol
(0.023)  and  LDL  cholesterol  levels
(PZ0.011).  Fasting  plasma  glucose
(PZ0.003) and glycosylated haemoglobin (PZ0.000) levels increased signi-
ficantly. Hyperglycaemia or deterioration of diabetes was documented in 67%
whereas gastrointestinal disturbances, mainly diarrhoea, were documented in
31% of patients. Among the 18 patients with available pituitary MRI at baseline
and at 6 months of follow-up, tumour remained stable in 13 patients and decreased
in
4 patients;  in  particular,
1 macroadenoma  became  a  microadenoma,
2
microadenoma  became  invisible.  A  slight  enlargement  was  found  in  one
macroadenoma. In conclusion, pasireotide treatment induces normalization of
UFC in nearly 70% of patients with very mild to moderate CD during clinical
practice, with consequent improvement in the clinical picture, but with occurrence
or deterioration of diabetes or gastrointestinal disturbances in 31-67% of cases.
These results confirmed the usefulness of pasireotide in controlling CD especially
in patients with non severe disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP736
EP737
Sublingual desmopressin is efficient and safe in the therapy of lithiasic
renal colic
Dumitru Branisteanu1, Catalin Pricop1 & Martha Orsolya2
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania;2University of
Medicine and Pharmacy Targu Mures, Targu Mures, Romania.
Background
Antidiuretic analogue desmopressin was tested in its intranasal form in renal
colic, with variable effects.
Aims
We evaluated the effects of sublingual desmopressin in lithiasic renal colic, alone
or combined with a non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID).
Materials and methods
Our prospective single-blind study included an initial number of 371 patients with
lithiasic renal colic randomized as follows: group NSAID (93 patients) received
ketorolac
30 mg  im,  groups  D60  and  D120  (84 and  61 patients)  received
sublingual Minirin Melt, 60 and 120 mg respectively, whereas groups C60 and
C120 (63 and 70 patients) received combinations of ketorolac and Minirin Melt.
Pain intensity was assessed using the visual analogue scale before and thirty
minutes after drug administration. Patients experiencing pain aggravation were
rescued and excluded from the study.
Results
Dropout incidence was higher in the NSAID group than in the groups treated with
desmopressin  in  monotherapy  or  combined  with  ketorolac
(P!0.05). Pain
intensity was diminished at least as potently by the therapy with desmopressin and
ketorolac. The higher dose of desmopressin and combination therapies decreased
pain intensity more than ketorolac alone (P!0.05). Mean pain decrease was
higher in the pooled combination group (C) than in the NSAID group or pooled
group treated with desmopressin in monotherapy (D) (P!0.05). Patients did not
experience side effects and their blood pressure remained constant in all groups.
Conclusions
Sublingual desmopressin is at least as potent as NSAID in the treatment of
lithiasic renal colic. Combinations of sublingual desmopressin and NSAID have
additive analgesic effects.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP737
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP738
The effects of pituitary replacement therapies on body composition in
adult patients with growth hormone deficiency
Stefano Frara1, Filippo Maffezzoni1, Anna Maria Formenti1,
Monica Mezzone1, Caroline Ronchini Ferreira1, Francesco Doglietto2,
Roberto Maroldi3, Gherardo Mazziotti1,4 & Andrea Giustina1
1Endocrinology Unit, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy;2Neurosurgery
Unit, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy;3Radiology Unit, University of
Brescia, Brescia, Italy;4Endocrinology unit, Internal Medicine, C. Poma
Hospital, Mantova, Italy.
Growth hormone deficiency (GHD) has become increasingly recognized as a
cause of metabolic syndrome, characterized by altered body composition and
adverse cardiovascular risk. The effects of other pituitary hormone deficiencies or
their replacement therapies on the metabolic profile in this clinical setting are still
largely unclear. In this study, we aimed to evaluating the effects of replacement
therapies of central hypoadrenalism and hypothyroidism on body composition in
a cohort of 33 patients (F 7, M 26, median age: 51 years) with treated (10 cases)
and untreated (23) GHD. Twenty-two patients had glucocorticoid deficiency,
whereas central hypothyroidism was found in 25 subjects. All patients were on
replacement therapy with hydrocortisone (median daily dose: 25 mg, range: 10-
40) and/or levothyroxine (L-T4 median daily dose: 1.27 mcg/Kg, range: 0.4-2.6).
Patients were evaluated for their body composition by DXA and anthropometric
measures. Subjects with untreated GHD showed higher total body fat percentage
(30.9% range: 22-52 vs. 23.0%, range: 11-42; PZ0.03) and waist circumference
(105 cm vs. 88 cm; PZ0.009) as compared  to patients with treated  GHD.
However, no significant differences in body composition were observed between
patients with treated hypoadrenalism and those with preserved adrenal function
(total body fat percentage: 30.6%, range 11-52 vs. 26.8, range 13-45; PZ0.48;
waist  circumference:
98.5 cm,  range
75-130  vs.
103.0 cm,  range:
75-140;
PZ0.98) and between patients treated with L-T4 and those with normal thyroid
function (total body fat percentage: 29.6%, range 11-52 vs. 30.4, range 13-45;
PZ0.82; waist circumference: 99.0 cm, range 75-130 vs. 98.0 cm, range: 75-
140; PZ0.91). Moreover, daily dose of hydrocortisone did not correlate with total
body fat percentage (r: 0.01; PZ0.9) and waist circumference (r: 0.29; PZ0.27).
Likewise, no significant associations were found between L-T4 daily dose and
total body fat percentage (r: 0.17; PZ0.4) and waist circumference (r: 0.25;
PZ0.30) in patients with central hypothyroidism. This study suggests GHD is the
main determinant of body composition in adult GHD patients and replacement
therapies with hydrocortisone and L-T4 do not seem to exert relevant effects on
this clinical outcome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP738
EP739
Nuchal Skinfold Thickness: a novel parameter for assessment of body
composition in childhood craniopharyngioma
Anthe S. Sterkenburg1,2, Anika Hoffmann1, Julia Reichel1, Kristin Lohle1,
Maria Eveslage3, Monika Warmuth-Metz4 & Hermann L. Muller1
1Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum Oldenburg, Medical Campus
University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany;2UMCG Groningen, Gronin-
gen, The Netherlands;3Institute of Biostatistics and Clinical Research,
University of Munster, Munster, Germany;4Department of Neuroradiology,
University Hospital, Wurzburg, Germany.
Context
Hypothalamic obesity, subsequent cardiovascular disease (CVD), and relapses/
progression have major impact on prognosis in childhood-onset craniophar-
yngioma (CP). We analyzed nuchal skinfold thickness (NST) on magnetic
resonance  imaging
(MRI)  performed  for  follow-up  monitoring  as  a  novel
parameter for body composition (BC) and CVD in CP.
Objective
Identify association of NST with body mass index (BMI), waist-to-height ratio
(WHtR), caliper-assessed skinfold thickness, and blood pressure (BP) in CP and
controls.
Patients and methods
In  a  cross-sectional  study,
94  CP recruited  in HIT-Endo, KRANIOPHAR-
YNGEOM 2000/2007 and 75 controls were analyzed for associations of NST
with BC and BP.
Results
NST correlated with BMI SDS (rZ0.78; P!0.001; nZ169) and WHtR (rZ0.85;
P!0.001; nZ86) in total cohort and CP patients (NST-BMI SDS: rZ0.77, P!
0.001, nZ94); NST-WHtR: rZ0.835, P!0.001, nZ43) and controls (NST-BMI
SDS: rZ0.792, P!0.001, nZ75; NST-WHtR: rZ0.671, P!0.001, nZ43).
Comparing NST with caliper-measured skinfolds, subscapular, and abdominal
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
skinfold thickness revealed highest correlation (P!0.001) with NST in both CP
(rZ0.802; rZ0.710) and controls (rZ0.724, rZ0.730). In CP patients, systolic
BP correlated with NST (rZ0.575, P!0.001), BMI SDS (rZ0.434, PZ0.004),
and WHtR (rZ0.386, PZ0.011). Similar results were observed for diastolic BP in
CP. In multivariate analyses, NST had predictive value for hypertension in post-
pubertal CP and controls (ORZ6.98, 95%CI [1.65,29.5], PZ0.008).
Conclusions
As monitoring of MRI and BC is an essential for follow-up in CP, NST could
serve as a novel, clinically relevant, and easily determinable parameter for
assessment of BC and CVD risk in CP patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP739
EP740
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and fatigue in long-term survivors of
childhood-onset craniopharyngioma
Anika Hoffmann1, Klaus Bootsveld2, Ursel Gebhardt1, Anna
M. Daubenbuchel1,3, Anthe S. Sterkenburg1,3 & Hermann L. Muller1
1Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum Oldenburg, Medical Campus
University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany;2Radiologie Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany;3UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Objective
Hypothalamic obesity in childhood craniopharyngioma (CP) patients bares a high
risk  for  development  of  metabolic  syndrome.  In  metabolic  syndrome,  the
development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is known. The aim of
this study is to detect the risk for NAFLD in childhood-onset CP.
Design
This cross-sectional study included liver computed tomography (CT); ultrasound
analysis of abdomen; measurements of serum parameters, height, weight and
body composition and daily medication of patients with childhood-onset CP.
Methods
Three  hundred  and  eighty-four  patients  recruited  in  trials  HIT  Endo  and
KRANIOPHARYNGEOM 2000 were analyzed. 94 survivors were included by
fulfilling the criteria of proven hypothalamic involvement (HI), a minimum time
interval of five years between diagnosis and study, and a minimum age of 18 years
at time of evaluation. A total of 19 patients agreed to participate. To quantify the
degree of steatosis hepatis, analyses of liver density were performed once by non-
contrasted CT of liver sections.
Results
NAFLD occurs in about 50% of CP patients with HI and is associated with
elevated liver enzymes and homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) index. Body
mass index (BMI) is not an effective predictive factor but body fat mass measured
by near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is. Over half of CP patients (60%) with
NAFLD are treated with stimulating agents, with risk of hepatic side effects.
Conclusions
NAFLD is a major adverse late effect in childhood-onset CP. NIRS rather than
BMI  should  be  used  to  measure  body  composition  and  predict  NAFLD.
Stimulating agents for treatment of fatigue and daytime sleepiness in CP should
be prescribed judiciously.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP740
EP741
Hypothalamic dysfunction revealed by magnetic resonance diffusion
tensor imaging in childhood leukemia survivors treated with cranial
radiotherapy but not in craniopharyngioma survivors
Cecilia Follin1, Sigridur Fjalldal1, Daniel Svärd2, Danielle van Westen2,
Sanaz Gabery3, 
˚sa Petersen3, Jimmy Lätt2, Lars Rylander4 & Eva
Marie Erfurth1
1Department of Endocrinology, Skane University Hospital, Lund, Sweden;
2Department of diagnostic radiology, Skane University Hospital, Lund,
Sweden;3Translational Neuroendocrine Research Unit, Department of
Experimental Medical Science, Lund, Sweden;4Institution of Clincial
Sciences, Lund, Sweden.
Background
Metabolic  complications  with  obesity  are  frequent  in  childhood  acute
lymphoblastic  leukemia
(ALL)  survivors  treated  with  cranial  radiotherapy
(CRT).  Childhood  onset  Craniopharyngioma
(CP)  survivors  without  hypo-
thalamic
(HT)  involvement  are  spared  gross  obesity.  Magnetic  resonance
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) provides information of microstructure function
of the brain and quantified as fractional anisotrophy (FA), mean diffusivity
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(MD), axial and radial diffusivity (AD, RD). Since MD in HT is reportedly
impaired (increased) in obese compared to non-obese subjects, we investigated
DTI in the HT.
Methods
Twenty nine ALL survivors on hormone supplementation were investigated 34
years after CRT (24 Gy). 17 CO-CP survivors with hormone supplementation but
without HT damage were investigated. Comparisons were made with these two
patient populations to 27 matched controls regarding DTI parameters in the HT
and for BMI, fat mass, fat free mass and waist/hip measurements.
Results
We recorded reduced FA (0.27 vs 0.29, PZ0.04), and increased MD (1.13 vs
1.00, P!0.001), AD (1.41 vs 1.25, P!0.001), and RD (0.99 vs 0.86, P!0.001)
in the right HT and increased MD (1.42 vs 1.25, P!0.001), AD (1.75 vs 1.58,
P!0.001), and RD (1.25 vs 1.04, P!0.001) in left HT in ALL survivors
compared to matched controls. The CPs showed no difference in the HT for these
parameters compared to controls. ALL survivors with a BMI R 25 showed
elevated MD (PZ0.03) and AD (PZ0.02) compared to ALL survivors with a
BMI ! 25 and compared to controls with BMI R 25 in the right HT. This was not
the case in CP survivors or in controls.
Conclusions
Thirty four years after CRT for ALL, DTI measures are deranged in the HT. ALL
survivors with a BMI R 25 were presented with worse HT dysfunction. CP
survivors  were  unaffected.  The  present  data  suggests  changes  in  the
microstructure of the HT in these ALL survivors.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP741
EP742
How frequently can we predict failure of fluid restriction in SIAD?
Results of a multicenter prospective audit
Martín Cuesta1, Ana Ortolá2,2David Slattery1, Aoife Garrahy1, Alfonso
Luis Calle Pascual2, William Tormey3, Isabelle Runkle de la Vega2 &
Christopher J. Thompson1
1Academic Department of Endocrinology. Beaumont Hospital/RCSI
Medical School, Dublin, Ireland;2Servicio de Endocrinología y Nutrición
del Hospital Clínico San Carlos/Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
Madrid, Spain;3Department of Chemical Pathology Beaumont
Hospital/RCSI Medical School, Dublin, Ireland.
Context
Fluid restriction (FR) is recommended as first line therapy for SIAD by both the
European1  and the American guidelines2  for management of SIAD. Not all
patients respond to FR however, and the American guidelines have identified
clinical predictors of failure to respond to FR. These include 1.Urine osmolality
(UOsm) O500 mOsm/Kg 2. Furst formula (ratio UNaCUK/pNa) O 1, and 3. 24
hour-urine volume!1500 ml
Objective
To ascertain the frequency with which patients with SIAD display at least one
criterion for prediction of no response to FR.
Design
Prospective, non-interventional, multicenter study in Hospital Clínico San Carlos
(Madrid) and Beaumont Hospital (Dublin).
Patients
Hundred  and  eighty  three  patients  with  SIAD  were  prospectively  and
consecutively recruited, 51 from Madrid and 132 from Dublin. The investigators
did  not  interfere  in  the  management  of  hyponatraemia  unless  specifically
requested.
Methods
Collection of data for predictors of response to FR. Results are expressed as
median with interquartile range (IQR).
Results
There was 100% ascertainment of the full diagnostic criteria for diagnosis of
SIAD. Median plasma sodium was 128 mmol/l (IQR:125,130 mmol/l). 4 patients
(2.2%) died during hospitalization. 75/183 (41%) patients had UOsm O500
mOsm/kg, 48/183 (26%) a Furst formulaO1, 49/103 (47%) urinary volume
!1500 ml/24 h. 109/183 (59%) had at least one criterion predicting no response
to FR.
Conclusion
More than half of SIAD patients had at least one criterion which has been
recommended to predict failure to respond to FR, the first line therapy for SIAD.
If the predictors of non-response to FR are correct, our data challenges the
conventional wisdom that FR is first-line treatment for SIAD. Further studies are
needed to test the validity of the predictors of non-response in the US guidelines.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP742
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP743
Liraglutide restores the endocrine function of islet’s b-cells and the
altered lipid profile in early stages of life induced by food restriction
in pregnancy
Yolanda Diz-Chaves, Laura Toba, Juan Fandin˜ o, Hugo Ogando,
María González-Nún˜ ez, Marina Romaní, Eva Vigo, Lucas González-Matías
& Federico Mallo
University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
Maternal food restriction during late pregnancy and lactation, increases the risk of
glucose intolerance and metabolic diseases such as diabetes & obesity in rats.
Liraglutide is a GLP-1 receptor agonists administered for treating DM2. The aim
of this study was to elucidate if liraglutide given to pregnant rats may prevent the
deleterious effects of malnourishment in male pups analyzed at 21 days of age.
Twenty eight Sprague-Dawley pregnant rats were included. Controls (CT) were
fed ad libitum, whereas dams in restricted group were fed with 50% (50FR) daily
intake  of  control  dams.  Pregnant  rats  were  treated  with  liraglutide
(100 mg/Kg/12 h; 50FR/LIR, CT/LIR) or vehicle (50FR/VEH, CT/VEH) from
gestational day 14 to 21.Pups body weight were controlled after birth. During
lactation the FR was reduced to 30%. At 21 days of age (D21) and before
weaning, pups were sacrificed. Serum and tissue samples were obtained and
stored at -80 8C until analysis.
50FR pregnant dams, gained 16% less body weight than controls, independently
of the treatment with liraglutide. After birth, 50FR/VEH and 50FR/LIR male pups
exhibited significantly decreased body weight at postnatal day 1, 7, 14 and 21
compared to CT/VEH. At D21, intraperitoneal fat pad is decreased in pups from
FR-dams, without differences in mesenteric & gonadal fat pads nor adrenal
glands’ weight. 50FR/VEH males displayed significantly decreased plasma lipid
profile (TG, LDL-HDL-total cholesterol). Glycaemia trends to be increased by
FR, but not differences were observed. However, 50FR/VEH group had increased
peptide-C levels compared to CT/VEH, and LIRA reverted the effect of FR. LIR
treatment increased lactate plasma levels just in 50FR males.
In conclusion, LIR restores the endocrine function of islet’s b-cells and the altered
lipid profile induced by FR in pregnancy in early stages of life.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP743
EP744
Assessment of bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling in the
differential diagnosis of the ACTH-Dependent cushing’s syndrome
Paloma Moreno-Moreno1, Inmaculada Prior-Sánchez1, Elvira Jiménez-
Gómez2, Jose Carlos Padillo-Cuenca1, Fernándo Delgado-Acosta2,
Rafael Oteros-Fernández2, María Sierra Corpas-Jiménez1 & María
Ángeles Gálvez-Moreno1
1Management Unit of Clinical Endocrinology and Nutrition. University
Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain;2Management Unit of Clinical
Radiology. University Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain.
Objective
The aim of this study was to assess the diagnostic accuracy of BIPSS with
desmopressin  stimulation  in  the  differential  diagnosis  of  ACTH-dependent
Cushing’s syndrome.
Patients and methods
Retrospective study of patients studied to our hospital for diagnosis of ACTH-
dependent Cushing’s syndrome (2000-2015). The histopathological results in
patients who underwent a surgical procedure was considered the reference for
statistical study of the accuracy of this technique. Statistical analysis: rates of
assessment of diagnostic tests and Cohen’s kappa coefficient as a measure of
interrater agreement between two observations.
Results
BIPSS was performed in 31 patients, of these, 24 patients were operated: 79.2%
Cushing’s disease (CD), 8.3% ectopic Cushing’s syndrome and 12.5% adrenal
Cushing’s syndrome. 84% of patients with CD had a central positive location in
BIPSS (Sensitivity: 0.84, IC 95%: 0.67-1.00); 100% of patients without CD had a
negative BIPSS for the central location (Specificity: 1.00, IC 95%: 1.00-1.00),
100% of patients with BIPSS positive for central location were diagnosed of CD
(Positive Predictive Value: 1.00, IC 95%: 1.00-1.00), 63% patients with BIPSS
negative for central location weren’t diagnosed of CD (Negative Predictive
Value: 0.63, IC 95%: 0,29-0,96). 88% of patients were correctly classified after
BIPSS (Efficiency: 0.88, IC 95%: 0.74-1.00). Good agreement is observed
between  the  location  of  pituitary  magnetic  resonance
(MRI)  or  computed
tomography (CT) and BIPSS (KZ0.625; PZ0.002).
Conclusions
BIPSS with desmopressin stimulation is useful in the differential diagnosis of
ACTH-dependent  Cushing’s  syndrome,  and  it  shows  good  agreement  with
imaging tests used.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP744
EP745
Hormonal characteristics of recurrent ACTH-secreting pituitary
adenomas
Evgenia Marova, Svetlana Arapova, Anastasia Lapshina,
Galina Kolesnikova, Andrey Grigoriev & Alexsandor Voroncov
Endocrinological Research Centre, Moscow, Russia.
Cushing’s disease (CD) remission after primary surgical treatment is achieved in
70-90%, but recurrence ranges 18-25% after.
The aim of this work was to study clinical, hormonal and MRI indicators before
and after surgical treatment in patients with recurrent CD to identify possible
predictors of recurrence. We examined 49 patients with recurrent CD in the active
stage (disease duration up to 3 years). Before neurosurgery blood ACTH (median
80.0 PG/ml) and cortisol (median 689.5 nmol/l), free cortisol level in daily urine
(median 1336.5 nmol/24 h) and 23:00 free cortisol in saliva (median of 18.4
nmol/l) were increased. 99.4% of patients had decreased cortisol with 74.7% from
baseline  during  HDDST,
10.6%  were  negative.  Microadenoma  in
69.9%,
macroadenoma in 30.1%. ACTH levels were correlated with the tumour volume.
According to the results surgical treatment patients were divided into 2 groups. The 1st
group 19 patients (38.8%) in whom the remission developed and adrenal insufficiency
(AI) signs appeared in 78.9% (15 patients), in 4 patients AI was absent. Remission lasted
from 3 to 3.9 years, In 30 patients from 2nd group (61.2%) the remission was not
achieved. In the group with remission there was a significant decrease blood ACTH and
cortisol concentration in the early postoperative period (7-10 days) and the normalization
of rhythm. The ACTH level was markedly decreased in the subgroup with AI. Remission
was longer in all patients with AI. Cortisol levels reduction in patients with AI was 75%
and in patients without AI - 65% in HDDST before the surgery.
Thus, the adenoma size (microadenoma), a more pronounced cortisol reduction
during HDDST before the operation, the presence of AI and the average ACTH level
below 10.0 PG/ml after surgery can be used as predictors of longer CD remission.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP745
EP746
Quality of sleep and salivary cortisol
Annamaria Painold1, Teresa Braunsteiner2, Norbert Tripolt2,
Helga Warnkross2, Hans-Peter Kapfhammer1, Thomas Pieber2 &
Barbara Obermayer-Pietsch2
1Department of Psychiatry, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;
2Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
Introduction
Contradictory associations between sleep disturbances and changes in cortisol
levels or unfavourable metabolic conditions like obesity and diabetes mellitus
have been observed.
The aim of the present study was to examine salivary cortisol in persons with
reduced sleep quality and to evaluate the relationship between sleep quality and
metabolic parameters.
Methods
The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PQ8I) was used in 154 healthy persons
(85 females; 27-76 years old; mean Z56.3, SD Z10.4 years) at the Medical
University of Graz. Quality of sleep was related to morning levels of salivary
cortisol,  the  Body  Mass  Index
(BMI)  and  the  Insulin  resistance  index
(HOMA-IR).
Results
55
(35.7%) of the study participants showed a decreased quality of sleep. 37
(43.5%) of all women reported sleep disturbances in contrast to 18 (26.0%) of
men (PZ0.025). Salivary cortisol levels of male poor sleepers were significantly
lower in comparison to the levels of male good sleepers (PZ0.007). Correlation
of the PQ8I with BMI or HOMA-IR did not show significant results.
Conclusions
Sleep disturbances are very common in our sample of healthy people. Particularly
in men, reduced sleep quality (e.g., prolonged sleep latency) was associated with
low morning levels of salivary cortisol. Missing correlations between sleep
problems and metabolic symptoms are contradictory to the literature and need to
be discussed. Our finding of low cortisol levels in poor sleepers represents
malfunction of the circadian rhythm and substantiates the psychobiological
significance of salivary cortisol.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP746
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP747
Limited value of the standard 8-hour water deprivation test in the
diagnostic work-up of patients with suspected diabetes insipidus
Penelope Trimpou, Daniel S. Olsson & Oskar Ragnarsson
Institute of Medicine at Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
Background
Diabetes insipidus (DI) is characterized by polyuria and consequently thirst and
polydipsia.  Excessive  water  intake  can  also  cause  polyuria,  i.e.  primary
polydipsia. It is of utmost importance to differentiate between the two disorders
since the treatment is different.
Aims
To study the clinical value of the standard 8-hour as well as an extended water
deprivation test in patients with polyuria and polydipsia.
Patients and methods
This was a retrospective, single centre study were results from
117 water
deprivation tests performed between 2004 and 2014 were reviewed. The same
protocol was used during the entire study period. Consumption of any liquids
during the test was strictly prohibited. Weight, osmolality and specific gravity
were measured on every occasion the patient urinated throughout the test.
Following  criteria  were  used  for  termination  of  the  test:  a)  O3%  weight
reduction, b) Urine specific gravity O1.020 or, urine osmolality O800 mOsm/L,
c) Intolerable adverse symptoms such as excessive thirst.
Results
Of 117 patients (70 women, 47 men), 21 (18%) were diagnosed with DI and 96
(82%) with primary polydipsia. The median (interquartile range; range) time to
termination of the test was 14 hours (10-16; 3-36) in patients with DI and 18 hours
(14-24; 7-48) in patients with primary polydipsia (PZ0.009). In only 4 (20%)
patients with DI and 5 (5%) patients with primary polydipsia the diagnostic
criteria were met in less than 8 hours. Of those diagnosed with primary polydipsia,
26
(27%) did not reach either urine specific gravity O1.020 or urine osmolality
O800 mOsm/L.
Conclusions
The standard 8-hour water deprivation test has a limited value in the diagnostic
work-up of patients with polydipsia-polyuria syndrome. Despite an extended test
for up to 48 hours, a partial DI may have been missed in as many as one fourth of
the patients diagnosed with primary polydipsia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP747
EP748
Severe carcinoid cardiac disease in a young patient with
neuroendocrine tumor of unknown origin
Catalina Poiana1,2, Ileana Nitu1 & Ionela Baciu1,2
1C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;
2C. Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Carcinoid cardiac disease is a rare cause of intrinsic right heart valve disease with
significant impact on mortality. We present the case of a young male patient
(38 yrs old) complaining in the last 5 yrs of abdominal pain associated with
flushing  of  the  face  that  progressively  worsened
(up  to
15  episodes/day)
accompanied by diarrhoea and, in the last 2 months, by night sweats, distension of
the  abdomen,  bilateral  ankle  swelling  and  progressive  limitation  in  effort.
Endocrine evaluation revealed high levels of serum markers for neuroendocrine
tumor (NET) and multiple large liver metastases on the CT scan of the abdomen,
confirmed on Octreoscan but with no identifiable primary. Biopsy of liver
metastasis diagnosed a Grade 2 NET -Ki67 4%, and was suggestive for secondary
determination from a small bowel NET. Due to the discovery of important ascites,
echocardiography  was  performed  and  revealed  important  tricuspid  and
pulmonary regurgitations, severe right heart failure and very high level of pro-
BNP  (8Xupper  limit).  Somatostatin  analogue  treatment  was  started  with
significant improvement in symptoms and NET markers, thus allowing cardiac
surgery with remission of symptoms related to heart failure, giving us time for
search of the primary and deciding the adequate treatment for the NET.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP748
EP749
Molecular genetic analysis in familial isolated pituitary adenoma
patients
Ekaterina Pigarova, Tatiana Tarasova, Elizaveta Mamedova,
Nadezhda Dalantaeva, Anatoliy Tulpakov & Larisa Dzeranova
Endocrinology Research Center, Moscow, Russia.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
FIPA- is a syndrome which includes pituitary adenomas with any kind of
secretion in two or more members in a family in the absence of MEN or Carney
complex; it also includes isolated family somatotropin syndrome (IFS).
Aim
Molecular genetic study of a gene panel in FIPA patient.
Materials and methods
Study included 1 family (2 men, 24 and 58 years) with pituitary adenomas with
homogeneous secretion type — somatotropinomas. Median height — 170 cm.
Level of GH — 80 ng/ml, IGF — 497.5, prolactin — 208.4. Brain MRI:
macroadenomas (maximum size of 39 mm). One patient after combination
therapy (somatostatin analogs in the maximum dose and primary surgery, without
radiological therapy), another patient without any treatment at the time of the
study. There were no normalization of GH and IGF.
Genomic DNA from a blood samples of patients underwent high-throughput
sequencing on the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (Life Technologies)
using a custom-designed AmpliSeq panel for the sequencing of a panel of genes
(MEN1, CDKN1B, PRKAR1A, GNAS, AIP, SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD,
PRKCA, CDKN2C, CDKN2A, POU1F1, PTTG2).
Results
Direct sequencing revealed mutation in exon 6 of the gene AIP p.R271W, which
was not previously described in studies.
Conclusion
We were able to identify a new AIP mutation in FIPA family.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP749
EP750
Nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma: a clinical and pathological study
Karina Arcano1, Vanessa Trivin˜o2, Paula García3, Juan José Díez1,
Fernando Cordido2, Carles Villabona3 & Pedro Iglesias1
1Hospital Ramón y Cajal (Department of Endocrinology), Madrid, Spain;
2Complejo Hospitalario Universitario A Corun˜a (Department of
Endocrinology), A Corun˜ a, Spain;3Hospital de Bellvitge (Department
of Endocrinology), Barcelona, Spain.
Objective
To assess clinical outcome after pituitary surgery in patients nonfunctioning
pituitary adenomas (NFPA) surgically treated in the past 3 decades in three
tertiary referral hospitals.
Methods
A multicenter retrospective study on clinical and pathological characteristics,
treatment patterns, and outcome in patients with NFPA periodically followed up
in specialized neuroendocrinology units who underwent surgery in the period
1982-2015 was performed.
Results
105 patients [54 women (51.4%)]; age 52.26G14.07 yr were studied. The tumor
was sporadic in 100 patients (95.2%) and in the context of a multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1 in 5 patients (4.8%; 4 women). The main reasons for consultation
were neuro-ophthalmologic symptoms such as visual disturbances (71.4%) and
headaches (44.8%). In the analysis of symptoms by sex, panhypopituitarism
(PZ0.004), central hypogonadism (PZ0.002), and secondary hypothyroidism
(PZ0.003) were more commonly observed in men. 90.5% of the cases were
macroadenomas
(nZ95),
15
of  them
(15.8%)  giant  adenomas
(R4  cm).
Immunohistochemical staining was mainly positive for LH (17.1%) and FSH
(15.2%). Ki67 index was studied in 41 patients, showing the majority (43.9%) a
value !1%. After a median of 57 months of follow-up, maximum tumor diameter
decreased from 2.9G1.0 to 1.2G1.2 cm (P!0.001); the percentage of patients
with no tumor on MRI was 25.7%. The percentage of patients with pathological
visual  fields  decreased  from
66.6%  to  33.6%;  whereas,  panhypopituitarism
increased from 6.7% to 14.3%. Surgery achieved complete cure (absence of
tumor and normal pituitary function) in 12 patients (11.4%).
Conclusion
NFPAs surgically treated in our country show a similar distribution between men
and  women,  although  they  are  clinically  more  symptomatic  in  the  first.
Histologically, NFPAs are usually gonadotropinomas with low proliferation
index.  Although  therapy  is  accompanied  by  improvement  in  visual  fields,
involvement of pituitary function does not improve over time. Complete cure is
uncommon and long-term follow-up is needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP750
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP751
Pressure pain threshold and b-endorphins plasma level are higher in
lean polycystic ovary syndrome women
Marta Kialka1, Tomasz Milewicz1, Sandra Mrozinska2, Krystyna Sztefko3,
Iwona Rogatko3 & Renata Majewska4
1Department of Gynecological Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University,
Medical College, Cracow, Poland;2Department of Metabolic Diseases,
Jagiellonian University, Medical College, Cracow, Poland;3Department of
Clinical Biochemistry, Jagiellonian University, Medical College, Cracow,
Poland;4Department of Epidemiology, Chair of Epidemiology and
Preventive Medicine, Jagiellonian University, Medical College, Cracow,
Poland.
Aim
Evaluation of pressure pain threshold and b-endorphin plasma level in lean
women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and healthy controls. The
associations  between  b-  endorphins  and  pressure  pain  threshold  were  also
investigated.
Materials and methods
In 48 lean women with polycystic ovary syndrome and 38 lean women without
this disorder plasma b-endorphins and pressure pain thresholds were measured.
Results
The b- endorphins level was higher in the PCOS group compared to the controls
(15.5G4.37 pg/ml vs 6.9G2.47 pg/ml, P!0.0001). In PCOS group pressure pain
thresholds measured on deltoid and trapezius muscles were higher compared to
the controls (9.33G1.3 kg/cm2  vs 5.19G0.57 kg/cm2, P!0.001; 8.23G1.04
kg/cm2  vs 4,79G0.55 kg/cm2, P! 0.001). The b- endorphin levels positively
correlated with pressure pain thresholds in polycystic ovary syndrome group.
Increase in b- endorphin level of 1 pg/ml was associated with increase of pressure
pain threshold value on deltoid muscle of 0.23 kg/cm2 (RZ0.632, PZ0.011) and
of 0.18 kg/cm2 on trapezius muscle (RZ0.588, PZ0.037).
Conclusion
b- endorphin serum level as well as pressure pain threshold are higher in lean
polycystic ovary syndrome group than in lean healthy controls. We found
correlations between b- endorphin levels and pressure pain threshold in the
polycystic ovary syndrome group. It may suggest the role of endogenous opioids
in the pathogenesis of polycystic ovary syndrome and also that increases in
circulating plasma  b- endorphins concentration  can increases pressure pain
threshold and consequently may modulate pain perception in PCOS lean women.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP751
EP752
The hypotalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis changes in non-pituitary brain
tumors survives and the best method of its diagnostic
Alla Yudina1, Tatiana Tselovalnikova1, Maria Pavlova1,
Nadezhda Mazerkina2, Olga Gheludcova3, Irina Arefeva2,
Evgenia Martynova1 & Anastasia Koklina1
1First Moscow State Medical University n.a. I.M. Sechenov, Moscow,
Russia;2Burdenko Neurosurgery Institute, Moscow, Russia;3Russian
Scientific Center of Roentgenoradiology, Moscow, Russia.
The number of the non-pituitary brain tumors survives increases and will be
growing  up  in  the  future.  Although  the  prevalence  of  secondary  adrenal
insufficiency (SAI) vary depending on the methods of diagnostic, we have a few
data about their ACTH and DHAE-S status. The aim of our study was to describe
the  hypotalamic-pituitary-adrenal  axis
(HPAA)  changes  after  craniospinal
irradiation (CRT) and diagnostic utility basal cortisol (BC), DHAE-S, glucagon
stimulation test (GST) in comparison with the insulin tolerance test (ITT) in this
group of patients.
ACTH and cortisol (basal and during ITT), DHAE-S was examined in 31
medulloblastoma survives (15 females), aged MeZ19[17;22], 2-15 year after
CRT and in 10 normal controls (MeZ21 [23;27] year), GST was performed in 19
patients and all healthy. The cut-off point for ITT was 550. After ITT patients was
divided into subgroups: SAI and without SAI (W-SAI). Receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed to identify the thresholds for BC,
DHAE-S and GST.
16/31 (51.6%) had SAI by ITT. All groups had the same ACTH level. BC was
significantly higher in W-SAI patient (MeZ559 [374;688]) compare with healthy
(MeZ363 [214;602] PZ0.037) and SAI (MeZ353[271;388] PZ0.001). SAI-
patients had DHAE-S (MeZ3.1[2.2;3.9]) lower than W-SAI (MeZ4.8[2.6;6.4],
PZ0.018) and controls (MeZ6.4[3.3;8.4], PZ0.06), W-SAI and healthy not
distinguished (PZ0.4) in DHAE-S level.
GST and ITT had the same maximal ACTH and cortisol level (PZ0.15 and PZ
0.6, Wilcoxon test). ROC-analysis showed area under curve (AUC) for GSTZ
0.64 with optimal cut-off for cortisolZ580; for BC AUCZ0.72 with maximum
specificity for cortisol more than 500; for DHAE-S AUCZ0.814 with optimal
sensitivity/specificity ratio DHAE-SZ4.4.
Prevalence of SAI after  CRT is high. W-SAI-patients have a tendency  to
increased BC while SAI-patients have a lower DHEA-S. GST may use as
screening stimulation test when ITT is contraindicated while BC and DHAE-S
levels in a grey zone.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP752
EP753
Prognostic factors of pituitary growth hormone-secreting tumors
Maria Rosa Alhambra Exposito1, Alejandro Iban˜ez Costa2, Paloma
Moreno Moreno1 & María Ángeles Gálvez Moreno1
1Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain;2Department of Cell
Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of Córdoba, HURS,
IMIBIC, CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn,
CÓRDOBA, Spain.
Background
Acromegaly is the consequence of excessive growth hormone (GH) secretion,
usually produced by a pituitary adenoma. Transphenoidal surgery is the first-
choice treatment; however, the development of new drug therapies in the last
years, specially the somatostatin analogues (SSA), has open new and promising
avenues for the treatment of pituitary tumors.
Objective
To determine whether a detailed knowledge of the clinico-pathological and
radiological  characteristics  of  the  acromegalic  patients  and  the  adenoma
molecular phenotype could help to predict the hormonal response to therapy in
order to improve the management of patients with this pathology.
Material and methods
Observational  study  including  patients  with  acromegaly,  diagnosed  at  the
Endocrinology and Nutrition Unit of the Hospital Reina Sofía from 2007 to
2012, in which surgery, radiology and molecular phenotyping of the adenoma was
carried out.
Results
22 patients were included (38G15 years old; 65% women). 3 patients meet cure
criteria. These who meet cure criteria have lower triglycerides levels (86G7 mg/dl),
more LH (9G10U/L) and FSH (15G20) than those who do not (Tg 128G54,
PZ0.021; LH 2G1, PZ0.019; FSH 3G3, PZ0.035). Inferior-posterior diameter
was lower in patients who meet healing criteria (15G1 vs 19G7; PZ 0.044) and
lower antero-posterior diameter (15G1 vs 19G7; PZ0.044). There were no
differences about comorbidities or symptoms at diagnostic between two groups.
Patients who meet cure criteria express more POMPC and GnRHR than those who
do not (POMC 2G3 vs 0G0, PZ0.036; GnRHR 0.8G0.1 vs 0G0, PZ0.034).
Conclusion
Overall, our results indicate that there is a significant correlation between several
pre-surgical parameters and the disease cure. Patients who meet cure criteria have
lower infero-posterior and antero-posterior diameter; and express more POMPC
and GnRHR.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP753
EP754
The use of a specific protocol for initiation of tolvaptan therapy in
mild/moderate euvolemic hyponatremia secondary to SIADH: not a
single case of overcorrection
Angela Amengual1, Ana Ortola1, Irene Crespo1, Rona Penso1, Teresa Ruiz-
Gracia1, Emilia Gomez-Hoyos2, Martin Cuesta-Hernandez3,
Alejandro Santiago1, Alfonso Calle1 & Isabelle Runkle1
1Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain;2Hospital Clinico Valladolid,
Valladolid, Spain;3Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
Introduction
ESE guidelines state a risk for overcorrection of serum sodium levels (SNa) with
vaptans. We present the results of our protocol for initiation of tolvaptan(TV)
therapy in SIADH.
Methods
Retrospective
(2011-15).
86 patients with SIADH-induced mild/moderate
hyponatremia received TV:7.5 mg day 1, ad-libitum liquids, no other Na-raising
therapies. Conventional hospitalization (CH):66/86, day hospital (DH):20/86.
Glycemia-corrected SNa determined at baseline (B), 6, 24, 48 hours post-initial
dose. When the 6-hour SNa ascent (SNaAsc) was R5 mmol/L, we administered
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
3 mcg DDAVPsc, with iv 5% dextrose (2 ml/kg/h 2 hours or 3 ml/kg/h 3 hours),
when SNaAsc was 6 or O6 mmol/L respectively. Patients received TV15 mg day
2, after register of 24-hour-SNaAsc, or 7.5 mg when the 6-hour SNaAscR 5. TV
dose was doubled on day 3 if SNaAsc!3. Overcorrection: O10 mmol/L 24-hour-
SNaAsc (O8 with Osmotic-Demyelination-Syndrome risk), O18 in 48 h (O16
with risk). SIADH etiology: ectopic (24/86), pharmacological (16/86), idiopathic
of the elderly (9/86), neurological (12/86), others (24/86). Na mmol/L, Osmolality
(Osm) mOsm/kg. T-test, X2, Spearman’s Rho. Results in Mean (SD).
Results
53/86 (61.6%) female, age 72.15 (13.03). Nadir SNa:120.53 (6.27). Baseline:
SNa:128.24 (4.14), Plasma Osm: 266.43 (9.16), Urine(U) Osm:450.1 (153.32),
UNa:85.18  (44.28).  In  mg/dl:  Uricemia:
3.07(1.43),  creatinine
0.67
(0.23).
Furst:0.92
(0.36).
6-hour: SNaAsc: 2.2 (2.84), 6-hour-UOsm:229.63 (162.9).
SNaAscR 5 in 13/86, 7/20 at DH, 6/68 with CH. NaAsc was higher in patients with
lower BSNa (RK-0.292, PZ0.006), lower uricemia (RZK0.382, PZ0.005),
and DH (pZ0.01). Patients with SNaAscR 5 had higher BUOsm: 559.46 (188.95)
vs. others: BUOsm:438.56 (136.94) (PZ0.032). 24-hour: SNaASC: 3.73 (3.06).
Those with 6-hour SNaAscR 5: 24-hour SNaAsc: 3.69 (3.43), vs. others: 24-hour
SNaASC: 3.74 (3.0) (PZ0.96). Maximum 24-hour SNaAsc: 10mmol/L (2/86).
48-hour: SNaAsc from B:6.2 (3.94). Maximum 48-hour SNaAsc:15 (1/86). 42/86
(48.8%) patients had 48-hour SNaR135. SNa changes at 6.24 and 48 hours were all
significant (P!0.001). Two patients referred intense thirst.
Conclusions
With our tolvaptan protocol, there was not a single case of overcorrection.
Tolvaptan  is  safe  and  effective  in  the  treatment  of  SIADH  patients  with
mild/moderate hyponatremia. Fluid intake at our Day Hospital must improve.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP754
EP755
Peripheral neuropathy and depressive symptoms in patients with
diabetes.
Azamatjon Umarov, Anna Prokhorova & Elbek Mamatkulov
Tashkent Medical Academy, Tashkent City, Uzbekistan.
Objective
To examine the association between severity of diabetic peripheral neuropathy
and  depressive  symptoms  and  investigated  the  potential  mediators  of  this
association.
Materials and methods
The  Hospital  Anxiety  and  Depression  Scale
(HADS)  was  used  to  assess
depressive symptoms in 492 patients (mean age 62 years; 70% male; 72% type 2
diabetic) with diabetic neuropathy diagnosed by the Neuropathy Disability Score
(NDS) and the Vibration Perception Threshold (VPT). Diabetic neuropathy
symptoms, activities of daily living (ADLs), and social self-perception were
measured by the neuropathy and foot ulcer-specific quality-of-life instrument,
NeuroQoL; perceptions of diabetic neuropathy symptom unpredictability and the
lack of effective treatment were assessed by the revised Illness Perception
Questionnaire.
Results
Both the NDS and VPT were significantly associated with the HADS after
controlling for demographic and disease variables. Although diabetic neuropathy
symptoms mediated this association, with unsteadiness being most strongly
associated with HADS, the relationship between foot ulceration and depression
was non-significant. The association between diabetic neuropathy symptoms and
HADS  was  partially  mediated  by  two  sets  of  psychosocial  variables:
1) perceptions of diabetic neuropathy symptom unpredictability and the lack of
treatment  control  and
2)  restrictions  in  ADLs  and  changes  in  social  self-
perception.
Conclusions
These  findings  establish  the  association  between  diabetic  neuropathy  and
depressive symptoms and identify potential targets for interventions to alleviate
depressive symptoms in persons affected by diabetic peripheral neuropathy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP755
EP756
Pharmacological effects of urocortin (Ucn) on nicotine-induced
oxidative stress to cardiomyocytes
Keiichi Ikeda1,3, Yoshinobu Manome1 & Katsuyoshi Tojo2,3
1Division of Molecular Cell Biology, Core Research Facilities for Basic
Science, Research Center for Medical Sciences, The Jikei University School
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan;2Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Diabetes and Endocrinology, The Jikei University School of Medicine,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Tokyo, Japan;3Institute of Clinical Medicine and Research, The Jikei
University School of Medicine, Kashiwa City, Chiba Prefecture, Japan.
Based on the known oxidative stress of nicotine, we examined the effects of Ucn I
on nicotine-induced oxidative stress in HL-1 cardiomyocytes. HL-1 cardiomyo-
cytes is plated on 96-well plate at a density of 2.0!104 cells/well with Claycomb
medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 0.1 mmol/L epinephrine.
After starvation of FBS and epinephrine with Claycomb medium, cells were
stimulated with or without (C/K)-nicotine, Ucn I and Ucn II. Cells were also
stimulated with (C/K)-nicotine after knocking down of Ucn I mRNA. Oxidative
stress is evaluated by conversion of 20 , 70 -dichlorodihydrofluorescin diacetate to
20, 70-dichlorodihydrofluorescein. (C/K)-nicotine exereted significant oxidative
stress on HL-1 cardiomyocytes, while (K)-nicotine, a cis-trans isomer of (C/K)-
nicotine, did not exert significant oxidative actions on HL-1 cardiomyocytes. Ucn
I suppressed not only (C/K)-nicotine-induced oxidative stress, but also oxidative
stress  in  standard  culture  condition  in  HL-1ardiomyocytes.  In  addition,
knockdown of Ucn I by siRNA enhanced (C/K)-nicotine-induced oxidative
stress. On the contrary, Ucn II alone, another agonist of corticotropin-releasing
factor type 2 receptor, did not exert significant anti-oxidative stress action at the
basal  condition,  but  reduced
(C/K)-nicotine-induced  oxidative  stress.  The
present  results  indicate  that  Ucn  I  may  exert  anti-oxidative  actions  on
cardiomyocytes, of which mechanism of actions are still remained to be clarified.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP756
EP757
Persistence of obesity and overweight in patients with Cushing disease
in remission
Paloma Moreno-Moreno1, Ángel Rebollo-Román1, Alejandro Ibá
˜ ez-
Costa2, María Rosa Alhambra-Exposito1, Concepción Mun˜oz-Jiménez1 &
María Ángeles Gálvez-Moreno1
1Management Unit of Clinical Endocrinology and Nutrition, University
Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain;2Department of Cell Biology,
Physiology and Immunology, Instituto Maimónides de Investigación
Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC), Hospital Universitario Reina Sofia,
CIBER Fisiopatolo, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain.
Objective
Obesity and overweight persist in patients with Cushing’s disease
(CD) in
remission, its persistence seems to be related to the duration of the disease. The
aim of this study was to describe the persistence of overweight/obesity in patients
with CD in remission and their relation to the duration of the disease.
Patients and methods
Descriptive study of patients with CD (1995-2015). Variables analyzed: age, sex,
body mass index (BMI), time from diagnosis to remission, urinary-free cortisol
(UFC), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), expression of proopiomelanocortin
(POMC) in tumor. Statistical analysis: comparing mean with t-student, comparing
proportions with McNemar and correlation study with Spearman’s Rho.
Results
49 patients with CD. 44.43G15.29 years old. Women: 89.8%. Remission 63.6%,
of this, the diagnosis: overweight 22.3% (16.7% grade I y 5.6% grade II) and
obesity 50.1% (27.8% grade I, 11.1% grade II, 5.6% grade III y 5.7% grade IV).
After remission: overweight 33.3% (19% grade I y 14.3% grade II; PO0.05) and
obesity 38.1% (9.5% grade I, 23.8% grade II, 4.8% grade III; PO0.05). Patients
with normal weight vs overweight/obesity in last revision: time from diagnosis of
CD to remission 41.16G34.54 vs 30.71G31.99 months (PZ0.78), UFC initial
509.86G700.44 vs 798.23G764.65 mcg/24h (PZ0.73), ACTH initial 75.21G
39.38 vs 91.68G65.47 pg/ml (PZ0.79). BMI the diagnosis 30.26G7.70 Kg/m2,
after  remission
29.60G6.39  Kg/m2
(PZ0.38).  BMI  has  a  strong  positive
correlation with POMC [rZ1 (PZ0.01)].
Conclusions
Overweight/obesity is not reduced significantly after remission of EC. In our
series, the persistence of overweight/obesity is not associated with a longer
duration of the disease before remissión or with initial levels UFG or ACTH,
although a positive correlation between BMI and POMC expression in the tumor
was observed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP757
EP758
Treatment of mild-moderate hyponatraemic encephalopathy with
intravenous bolus therapy of 3% hypertonic saline solution: a case
series
Guillermo Ropero Luis1, José Abuín Fernández2, Francisco
Sánchez Torralvo2, Beatriz Rivas Sánchez1, Estíbaliz Romero Masa1,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Viyey Kishore Doulatram Gamgaram2, Sonia Santamaría Fernández1 &
Ricardo Gómez Huelgas1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Regional Universitario de
Málaga, Málaga, Spain;2Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition,
Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Málaga, Spain.
Introduction
Hyponatraemia is the most common electrolytic disorder in clinical practice. We
designed a protocol, based on the latest consensus statements and adapted to our
Hospital, for the use of 3% hypertonic saline solution (HSS) in patients with
hyponatraemia.
Material and methods
Unicentric observational study of a case series. We collected data from 14 adult
patients with severe hyponatraemia (serum sodium [SNa] !125 mmol/l) and
mild-moderate hyponatraemic encephalopathy (no signs of brain herniation)
treated with an intravenous bolus of 250 ml of HSS over 30 minutes and
reevaluated 6 hours later. Our goal was to raise 4-6 mmol/l as soon as possible,
and 6-8 mmol/l in 24 hours with a limit of 12 mmol/l. The bolus was repeated if
SNa raised !3 mmol/l.
Results
Median age (IQR) was 69.9 (64.5-78.1) years, and 62% were female. Baseline
median SNa was 120 (114.3-122.8) mmol/l. Median SNa 6 hours after the bolus
was 124.4 (120.7-128.3) mmol/l, a median raise of 5 (4.4-6.2) mmol/l (P!
0.001). One patient required an additional bolus. Median SNa raise 24 hours after
the bolus was 6 (3.9-8.2) mmol/l (P!0.01) in 9 patients; there was no significant
change between 6 and 24 hours. Median rise per 100 ml of HSS was 2 (1.7-2.5)
mmol/l after 6 hours and 2.4 (1.6-3.3) mmol/l after 24 hours. No patients required
treatment for overcorrection nor had adverse outcomes. No significant changes
were observed in serum potassium and creatinine.
Conclusions
Our data suggests that this protocol is safe and effective to reach the goals in the
treatment of severe hyponatraemia with mild-moderate encephalopathy in the
first 6 hours, without noticeable side effects or overcorrection. Patients at low risk
of osmotic demyelination may receive another bolus to reach a higher SNa in
24 hours. Larger studies are required to confirm these results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP758
EP759
Review of neonatal hypoglycaemia and adverse neurological outcomes
Roisin Begley, Bushra Rafique, Olajumoke Davies & Mohamed Abdul
Salam Ahmed
Queens Hospital, Barking, Havering and Redbridge University Hospitals
NHS Trust, Romford, Essex, UK.
Introduction
Neonatal hypoglycaemia (NH) is a well-recognized cause of adverse neurological
outcomes. While hypoglycaemic brain injury is well reported in the literature
there is limited data on the effect of neonatal hypoglycaemia solely with other risk
factors for brain injury excluded. The aim of study was to evaluate the long-term
outcome in patients with a history of symptomatic NH and no other risk factors of
brain injury.
Methodology
This retrospective cohort study examined the outcome among children with
history of symptomatic NH. The study looks at babies born from January 2008
and January 2014 admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit. A total 6411 new
born infants were identified. 850/6411 were recorded as having NH on neonatal
electronic database. 518/850 were excluded for a gestational age ! 36 weeks.
After further inclusive and exclusion criteria were applied to identify patients
with solely NH as a risk factor for poor neurological outcome, 94/855 patients met
study eligibility. Data for these patients was reviewed from variety sources
including neonatal discharge summary, community assessments, ophthalmology,
paediatric medical notes and laboratory results. 2/94 patients were found to have
adverse neurological outcomes. These two cases are presented and analysed.
Results and conclusion
We identified 94 eligible children with neonatal hypoglycaemia and no other risk
factors for brain injury. 2/94 (2.1%) patients had NH related brain injury and adverse
neurological outcome- both children had history of neonatal seizures. The remaining
92/92 (97.8%) had favourable neurological outcome and no neonatal seizures.
Our study concludes that neonatal hypoglycaemia causes global brain injury and
second, neonatal seizure is a significant predictor of the potential long-term poor
outcomes of isolated NH. Education of the parents/carers and health professional
remains an important strategy. Further research on the effect of NH and NH related
seizure on long-term neurological outcomes in needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP759
EP760
Morbimortality of hospitalized patients receiving parenteral nutrition
and presenting hyponatremia
Emilia Gomez Hoyos1, Pilar Matia Martín2, Ana Ortola Buigues2,
Irene Crespo Hernández2, Martin Cuesta Hernandez2, Natalia Perez Ferre2,
Miguel Angel Rubio Herrera2, Daniel De Luis Román1, Alfonso Calle
Pascual2 & Isabelle Runkle de la Vega2
1Hospital Clínico de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain;2Hospital Clínico San
Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction
Hyponatremia is the most frequent electrolyte disorder found in clinical practice,
and has been associated with increased morbimortalty. Hyponatremia is even
more common among patients receiving parenteral nutricion(PN), a therapy
increasingly in use. However, the morbimortality of hyponatremic patients on PN
is unknown.
Methods
Retrospective study, selecting all patients receiving PN in a teaching hospital
from
01/11/11
to
01/06/12.  We  evaluated  hospital  length-of-stay
(LOS),
in-hospital mortality, serum Sodium (SNa) at admittance, at start and end of
PN, and at discharge. Hyponatremia defined as glycemia- corrected SNa ! 135
mmol/L, triglycerides!400 mg/dl. X2, T-test, Mann.whitney U, Logistic reg-
ression. SPSS 15.
Results
Two hundred and twenty-two patients received PN (57.2% males). Median age
75[61-82]. 14.5% presented malnutrition (by BMI). Charlson index 3.3 (SD2.4).
LOS: 30[20-40] days. Mortality: 17.7%. 50.4% (112/222) presented hypona-
tremia in at least one SNa determination, 27% in at least 25% of SNas, 15.7% in at
least 50% of SNas, and 3% in at least 75% of SNas. 23.2% of hyponatremic NP
patients died during hospitalization, as compared with 11.8% of normonatremics.
However, only sustained hyponatremia (with 75% or more SNa determinations
!135 mmol/L) was independently associated with increased mortality, following
correction  for  age,  gender,  Charlson  index,  and  BMI
(OR  7.38  [IC  95%:
1.07-50.8]; PZ0.042). LOS !30 days were found in 42.8% of PN patients with
hyponatremia versus 72.7% with normonatremia. (PZ0.001).Logistic regression
analysis indicated that the absence of hyponatremia was associated with a shorter
LOS (! 30 days), even when adjusted for comorbilities (OR:3.89; CI: 95%:
2.11-7.18; PZ0.001).
Conclusions
The  presence  of  sustained  hyponatremia  is  independently  associated  with
increased mortality in patients receiving parenteral nutrition. The absence of
hyponatremia is independently associated with a shorter hospital length-of-stay.
Hyponatremia should not be overlooked in PN patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP760
EP761
The quality of life of patients with nonfunctional pituitary adenomas
and growth hormone deficiency
Yulduz Urmanova1,2 & Mushtary Saidnazirkhanova1,2
1Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan;2Republic
Scientific Research Centre of Endocrinology, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Aim
To assess the quality of life of patients with nonfunctional pituitary adenomas
(NFPA) and growth hormone deficiency (GHD).
Materials and methods
Eighteen GHD patients with non-functional pituitary adenomas (NFPA), (12 F/6
M), aged 35.5G14.4 yr (meanGSD; range 23-58), body mass index (BMI)
28.6G0.6, with a history of adult-onset hypothalamic-pituitary disease, were
recruited for the study. The examination included hormonal assessment (level of
hormones, such as, prolactin, STH, LH, FSH, TTH, cortisol, T3, T4 and others),
testing of GHD by insulin (ITT), perimetry, assessment of neurological status,
clinical ultrasound of the thyroid and the genitals, investigation of psychological
well-being and Quality of Life of adults with GHD (QoLAGHD). Complex
roentgenologic examination of the sellar area by means of computer (CT) and
magnetic resonance tomography (MRI) was performed in all patients.
Results
Using the ITT as our ‘gold standard’ with a GH response of 6.3 mU/L as our cut-
off to define GHD. Endosellar macroadenomas up to 20 mm in diameter were
found in 6 patients, 12 persons having large adenomas up to 40 mm in diameter
with sellar growth.
Hormonal disorders in 16 persons (88.8%) with hypopituitarism being found in
14
(77.7%). General brain symptoms were present in 15 patients (83.3%).
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Hypopituitarism, that is, reduction in the levels of pituitary tropic hormones, such
as, STH, LH and FSH was found in 77%, large pituitary tumors with supra-, para-
and infrasellar growth being registered in the patients.
The investigation by questionnaire by QoLAGHD showed, that mean range data
achieved 8.7G0.2.
Conclusions
parallel to decrease in other pituitary hormones STH level reduction is typical of
patients with non-functional pituitary tumors; 2) patients with NFPA need in
control of pituitary hormone levels, MRI/CT and evaluation of Quality of Life by
investigation of psychological well-being.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP761
EP762
The histological structure of nonfunctional pituitary
giant adenomas (NFPA)
Yulduz Urmanova & Kamola Alimova
Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Aim of the research
To study the histological structure of nonfunctional pituitary giant adenomas
(NFPA)
Materials and methods
We observed 11 patients with giant NFPA, among them 5 male and 6 female,
mean age 37.8. All patients were undergone surgical treatment by transsphenoidal
access in Center of Endocrinology of MoH RU in neurosurgery department
during 2014-2015 year.
All patients were undergone the spectrum of analyses, including endocrine status
assessment, clinical, biochemical, hormonal (GH, LH, FSH, prolactin, TSH,
testosterone  and  others),  radiological
(CT/MRI  of  Turkish  saddle),  and
histological study. All patients have pituitary adenoma more than 5 cm.
Depending on the type of cells found on the histological study, patients with
NFPA (chromophobic adenomas) were divided into 3 groups: 1st group - small
cell (undifferentiated) chromophobic adenoma - 5 patients, 2nd group - large cell
chromophobic adenoma - 6 patients, and 3rd group - oncocytoma (none).
Results
Preliminary analysis of the research showed that among the observed patients the
most disposed to invasive total growth had patients of the 1st group with small
cell histological structure of NFPA. Besides, this patients had more frequent
tumor  relapse  in  post-operative  period
-
3
patients
(27.3%),  had  acute
manifestation of the disease with general cerebral symptoms and neuroendocrine
disturbances (secondary amenorrhea in female, potency and libido decrease in
male, metabolic syndrome, visual disturbances and others). Two female patients
aged  27.5
from  the
1st  group  were  undergone  repeated  selective  pituitary
adenomaectomy 3 times.
Conclusions
1.  Small  cell  NFPA  have  the  most  aggressive  growth  and  tumor  relapse.
2. Following research is necessary to study the markers of aggressiveness in all
3 groups.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP762
EP763
The comparison between neurological symptoms and histological
structure in chiasm and sellar region giant tumors
Yulduz Urmanova & Kamola Alimova
Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Aim of the research
To study  special  features  of pituitary adenoma
(PA) clinical  manifestation
depending on hormonal characteristic and histological structure, and reveal
correlation between clinical manifestation and tumor pathology.
Materials and methods
Outcomes of surgery in 66 patients with PA were analyzed. Age of patients at
surgery was from 18 to 71 years. Mean age of patients - 44 years.
According  to  K.  Thapar  classification
(1977),
4
patients
(6%)  had  a
corticotropinoma, 11 patients (17%) had somatotropinoma, 11 patients (17%)
had prolactinoma and remaining 40 patients (60%) had non-functioning pituitary
adenomas (NFPA). PA was diagnosed in according with clinical signs, hormonal
tests,  neuroendocrine  status  and  histological  analysis.  All  patients  were
undergone surgical treatment by transsphenoidal access Center of Endocrinology
of MoH RU in neurosurgery department during 2014-2015 years.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
According to histology, 47 adenomas (71%) were chromophobe, 15 adenomas
(23%) were acidophilic and 2 adenomas (3%) were basophilic, and 2 adenomas
(3%) were defined as compound.
Comparison between histological structure and clinical manifestation revealed
that chromophobe prolactinomas showed progressive course, big size of the
tumor with the tendency to extrasellar growth and barely respond to conservative
treatment. Acidophilic prolactinomas performed gradual onset with the endocrine
dysfunction,  body mass changes,  dysmenorrhea,  galactorrhea,  intracranial
hypertension and erectile dysfunction in men.
Histology  in
4
patients  revealed  basophilic  structure  of  PA  and  clinical
manifestation have seen in short period.
Clinical manifestation of NFPA presented in all patients with the focal symptoms,
including  dislocation  and  hypertension  syndromes,  visual  and  oculomotor
disturbances.  Besides,  there  apoplexy  symptoms  have  seen  which  degree
depended on the course of disorder.
Conclusions
In  according  with  literature  reviews  and  own  study  results  early  clinical
symptoms of PA should be evaluated opportunely and indications for surgery
should  be  defined  taking  into  account  clinical  forms  which  decreases  the
complications development risk.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP763
EP764
Presence of adrenal lesions at diagnosis of cushing’s disease
Paloma Moreno-Moreno, María Rosa Alhambra-Expósito,
Concepción Mun˜ oz-Jiménez, Inmaculada Prior-Sánchez &
María Ángeles Gálvez-Moreno
Management Unit of Clinical Endocrinology and Nutrition, University
Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain.
Objective
Patients with Cushing’s disease (CD) may have adrenal nodules or hyperplasia
related chronic hyperstimulation by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The
aim of this study was to describe the prevalence of adrenal nodules or hyperplasia
in patients with CD and their relation with ACTH levels at diagnosis.
Patients and methods
Descriptive study of patients with CD (1995-2015). Variables analyzed: age, sex,
body mass index (BMI), ACTH, urinary-free cortisol (UFC), abdominal magnetic
resonance (MRI) or computed tomography (CT). Statistical analysis: comparing
proportions with the chi-squared and comparing means with Student’s test.
Results
Forty-nine patients with CD. 44.43G15.29 years old. Women: 89.8%. 33 patients
with abdominal MRI or CT: 30.30% adrenal nodules and 18.18% bilateral adrenal
hyperplasia. Patients with adrenal lesions vs no adrenal lesions: age 44.56G10.43
vs 43.81G18.9 years old (PZ0.84), ACTH 80.42G60.80 vs 76.61G60.32 pg/ml
(PZ0.87), UFC 636.89G675.26 vs 768.64G786.56 mcg/24h (PZ0.61), IMC
31.90G10.24 vs 33.22G7.19 kg/m2 (PZ0.66), woman 81.3 vs 93.8% (PZ0.94),
remission of CD 66.7 vs 85.7% (PZ0.94).
Conclusions
Adrenal lesions are detected in half of the patients with CD which is performed
abdominal MRI or TC, adrenal nodules are more frequent. The presence of
adrenal lesions is not related with ACTH levels at diagnosis, neither with UFC,
BMI, age, sex or remission of CD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP764
EP765
History before diagnosis in childhood craniopharyngioma: associations
with initial presentation and long-term prognosis
Anika Hoffmann1, Svenja Boekhoff1, Ursel Gebhardt1,
Anthe S Sterkenburg1,2, Anna M Daubenbuchel1,2, Maria Eveslage3 &
Hermann L Muller1
1Dep. of Pediatrics, Klinikum Oldenburg, Medical Campus University
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany;2UMCG Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands;3Institute of Biostatistics and Clinical Research, University of
Munster, Munster, Germany.
Objective
Childhood craniopharyngiomas (CP) are often diagnosed after long duration of
history (DOH). Tumor size, hypothalamic involvement (HI), and obesity are
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
associated with reduced overall survival (OS) and functional capacity (FC). The
effect of DOH and specific symptoms in history on presentation at initial
diagnosis and long-term prognosis are unknown.
Design
Retrospective  analysis  of  patients’  records  and  prospective  longitudinal
follow-up.
Methods
Histories of 411 CP patients recruited in HIT Endo, KRANIOPHARYNGEOM
2000 were retrospectively evaluated for DOH, symptoms and characteristics. The
effect of specific manifestations and DOH on clinical presentation and tumor
characteristics at time of initial CP diagnosis and long-term outcome were
analyzed. Main outcome measures were 10-yr OS and progression-free survival
(PFS), FC, and body mass index (BMI) during longitudinal follow-up.
Results
Median DOH was 6 mo (range: 0.1-108 mo) and correlated with age at diagnosis.
Tumor size, HI, degree of resection, and BMI at diagnosis were not related to
DOH. In multivariate analysis adjusted for age at diagnosis, only hydrocephalus
was found to have a relevant influence on DOH. Visual and neurological deficits
were associated with larger initial tumor size and impaired 10-yr OS. Weight gain
and growth failure were observed with longest DOH. PFS and FC were not related
to any specific symptom. Endocrine deficits at diagnosis were associated with
long DOH.
Conclusions
CP  is  frequently  diagnosed  after  long  DOH,  especially  in  older  children.
However, DOH was not associated with tumor size, HI, survival or FC. Visual and
neurological deficits necessitate rapid diagnostic work-up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP765
EP766
Hydrocephalus and hypothalamic involvement in pediatric patients
with craniopharyngioma or cysts of Rathke’s pouch: impact on
long-term prognosis
Anna M Daubenbuchel1,2, Anika Hoffmann1, Ursel Gebhardt1,
Monika Warmuth-Metz3, Anthe S Sterkenburg1,2 & Hermann L Muller1
1Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum Oldenburg, Medical Campus
University Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany;2UMCG Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands;3Department of Neuroradiology, University
Hospital, Wurzburg, Germany.
Objective
Pediatric patients with sellar masses such as craniopharyngioma (CP) or cyst of
Rathke’s pouch (CRP) frequently suffer disease- and treatment-related sequelae.
We analyzed the impact and prognostic relevance of initial hydrocephalus (HY)
and hypothalamic involvement (HI) on long-term survival and functional capacity
(FC) in children with CP or CRP.
Subjects and methods
Using retrospective analysis of patient records, presence of initial HY or HI was
assessed in 177 pediatric patients (163 CP, 14 CRP). Twenty-year overall survival
(OS) and progression-free survival (PFS), functional capacity, and body mass
index (BMI) were analyzed with regard to initial HY, degree of resection, or HI.
Results
One hundred and five patients (103/163 CP, 2/14 CRP) presented with initial HY
and 96 presented with HI. HY at diagnosis was associated (PZ0.000) with
papilledema, neurological deficits, and higher BMI at diagnosis and during
follow-up. OS, PFS, and FC were not affected by HY at initial diagnosis. HI at
diagnosis (96/177) had major negative impact on long-term prognosis. Sellar
masses with HI were associated with lower OS (0.84G0.04; PZ0.021), lower FC
(PZ0.003), and higher BMI at diagnosis and last follow-up (PZ0.000) when
compared with sellar masses without HI (OS: 0.94G0.05). PFS was not affected
by HI or degree of resection.
Conclusions
Initial HY has no impact on outcome in patients with sellar masses. OS and FC are
impaired in survivors presenting with initial HI. PFS is not affected by HY, HI, or
degree of resection. Accordingly, gross-total resection is not recommended in
sellar masses with initial HI to prevent further hypothalamic damage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP766
EP767
Emotional behavior is modulated by liragutide in an age and gender
manner in rats from food restriction mothers
Laura Toba, Juan Fandi
˜ o, María González-Nún˜ez, Lucas González-Matías,
Yolanda Diz-Chaves & Federico Mallo
University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
Food restriction (FR) of mothers during the perinatal period, can lead to disorders
in emotional behaviors at offspring. GLP-1 may play a role in the regulation of
anxiety-like behavior in rodents. The aim of this study was to asses if Liraglutide
(a  GLP-1
receptor  agonist;  LIR)  given  to  pregnant  rats  may  prevent  the
deleterious effects of FR in the anxiety-like behavior in pups at 21 days and two
months of age males.
Twenty-five pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were included. Food restriction (50%)
respect to controls started at day 12 (D12) of pregnancy and CT group remain
undisturbed. Rats were treated with liraglutide (100 mg/Kg/12h; 50FR/LIRA,
CT/LIRA) or vehicle (50FR/VEH, CT/VEH) from gestational day 14 to 21.
During lactation the FR was 30%. Anxiety-like behaviors were assessed using the
open field test in pups at day 21 and two months of age. Animal performance was
recorded in video for posterior analysis.
At D21, there were no differences in the time spent in 10, 20 or 30 cm or in the
border between 50FR vs. control, either males or females. However, liraglutide
significantly reduced the time spent in 10 cm and in the border, and increased the
time in 20 or 30 cm just in 50FR males but not in females. Liraglutide increases
15.66 times the % of time spent at center of open field in 50FR males compared to
CT/VEH,  26.6
times  compared  to  CT/LIRA  and
11.75
times  respect  to
50FR/LIRA females. However, at two months of age, no effect of liraglutide in
the time spent in the center of 50FR males was observed.
In conclusion besides FR did not induce behavioral alterations at 21 days or two
months of age, liraglutide reduced the % of time in the center only in 50FR male
pups,  indicating  an  age-dependent  effect  of  liraglutide  under  non-stressed
conditions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP767
EP768
Characteristics and management of hospitalized patients with
hyponatremia in an endocrinology department
Pablo Sanz Revert, Juan Carlos Ferrer García, Carlos Sánchez Juan &
Lourdes García Blasco
University General Hospital of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
Hyponatremia  is  the  electrolyte  disorder  most  commonly  encountered  in
hospitalized patients. The prevalence and characteristics of patients admitted
with hyponatremia are analyzed in this study.
Description  of  methods/design:  cross  sectional  study  is  carried  out  at  the
University General Hospital of Valencia, comprising a population of 350,000.
681 of the 30676 patients admitted during the period from January 2014 to
December 2015 had hyponatremia included as a diagnosis at the discharge report.
72 patients admitted in Endocrinology due to hyponatremia are analyzed. We
analyzed patient characteristics, mean length of stay, treatment used, serum
sodium at admission and discharge, urine and plasma osmolality, urinary sodium
and potassium, TSH and cortisol levels, as well as mortality and the presenter
prior to hyponatremia.
Results
Diagnosis of hyponatremia in the discharge report appeared in 2.5%. Of these,
9.6% were admitted in Endocrinology because hyponatremia was the main
diagnosis. Of the 72 patients there were 57 women, with a mean age of 77.8G
13.61 years. Mean length of stay was 5.7G3.5 days and the months of May and
June the highest incidence. The most common causes were diuretics (38%),
SIADH (24%) and multifactorial etiology (23%). Sodium income was 119G6
mEq/l and at discharge was 132G3 mEq/l. 31% of patients had low sodium serum
levels before admission. Mortality was 2.8%.
Conclusion
Among admissions by hyponatremia, most are women over 75 years and the
diuretics were the main etiology. The previous high prevalence of hyponatremia
in these patients suggests that a careful management and monitoring of them
might prevent subsequent admissions for this cause.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP768
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP769
Factors influencing health-related quality of life in chronic endocrine
diseases: results from a focus group discussion (qualitative research)
Mareike Stieg1, Dorothea Gebert1, Anna Kopczak1, Marion Muller2 &
Caroline Sievers1
1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany;2sine-Institute,
Munich, Germany.
Introduction
Improvement of health related quality of life (QoL) is one of the main goals
defined by the WHO and besides reduction of mortality and morbidity an
important objective for health outcomes. In chronic endocrine diseases, QoL
often remains impaired despite cure or remission of the disease. In quantitative
analyses, factors such as age, gender, BMI and depression, are associated with
reduced  QoL.  However,  aspects  of  social  interaction  and  more  complex
individual concepts are difficult to obtain from classical quantitative research.
Therefore we performed a qualitative social research analysis based on a focus
group discussion according to a predefined protocol which had been reviewed by
an endocrinologist, a sociologist and an epidemiologist.
The aim of this project was to identify possible modifiable factors influencing
patients’ QoL in order to provide preventative strategies for improving patient
management and long-term health outcome.
Results
Patients with chronic endocrine diseases were invited through a local support
group. Patients (nZ18) were divided into two groups, each chaired by two
persons (one medical doctor and certified sociologist). Mean age of participating
women (nZ11) was 52.7 years whereas mean age of men (nZ7) was 55 years.
Results from the discussion are categorized according to a) areas of health-related
quality of life that are influenced, b) how patients were able to modify them and
c) which interventions were tested.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP769
EP770
Study protocol: ‘Health outcomes in pituitary adenoma’s: focus on
hormone deficiencies’
Gunter Stalla1, Caroline Sievers1 & Victor Geraedts1,2
1Max-Planck-Institut fur Psychiatrie, Munich, Germany;2Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Background
Acromegaly is characterized by hormonal excess of GH and IGF-1, however
many patients suffer from hypopituitarism as a result from either disease or
treatment. Quality of Life (QoL) is known to be reduced both in acromegaly, with
mixed results on the role of biochemical control herein, and hypopituitarism.
Studies report the level of surgery-induced hypopituitarism after acromegaly at
12.79% (CI 9.88-16.00%). Treatment of acromegaly aimed at normalization of
hormone levels may therefore result in hypopituitarism with concomitant reduced
QoL. Particularly Growth Hormone Deficiency (GHD) has been reported to be a
risk factor for reduced QoL.
Aim
The  primary  aim  is  investigate  whether  correction  of  GHD,  results  in
improvement  of  clinical outcomes. Second,  we aim to investigate  whether
correction of corticotroph deficiency, thyroid deficiency, prolatin defiency as well
as panhypopituitarism results in improvement of clinical outcomes, particularly
when compared to correction of GHD. Third, we intend to investigate whether
hormone  deficiencies  following  other  pituitary  diseases  such  as  Cushing’s
disease, prolactinoma and Non-Functioning Pituitary Adenoma (NFPA) have a
similar effect on QoL when compared to acromegaly.
Outcomes
A composite score from the KIMS study group applying waist circumference,
total cholesterol and disease specific QoL has been used to evaluate the clinical
response to GH suppletion. We further augment this score to investigate the
clinical response after other deficiencies, as well as evaluating the response after
adequate suppletion. Individual QoL scores (both generic and disease-specific)
and psychopathology scores (depressive symptoms and anxiety) will be used as
secondary outcomes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP770
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Nuclear receptors and Signal transduction
EP771
The thyroid hormone antagonizes STAT3-dependent transcription in
hepatocarcinoma cells
Elvira Alonso Merino, Arturo José Valin˜o Pérez, Constanza Contreras
Jurado & Ana Aranda
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Madrid, Spain.
The known functions of the thyroid hormones in the liver have expanded from
their well-known roles in regulating metabolism to also participate in liver
regeneration, senescence and hepatocarcinogenesis. The transcription factors
STAT3 and NF-kB play a key role in liver homeostasis, in the response to
infection and inflammation and in hepatocarcinoma development. Interleukin 6
(IL-6) and Tumour Necrosis a (TNFa) are the best-known cytokines responsible
for hepatic stimulation of these signalling pathways. We have analysed the effect
of thyroid hormones in the response of hepatocarcinoma cells to these factors. We
found that triiodothyronine (T3) suppresses IL-6 signalling in cultured Hep3B
cells, inhibiting the activation of the main cytokine downstream targets: STAT3
and ERK. In contrast, no inhibitory effects of T3 in the NF-kB response to TNFa
were observed. In agreement with these results, T3 strongly antagonized IL-6
stimulated activity of a reporter plasmid bearing STAT-binding elements, while
the hormone did not reduce activation by TNFa of a reporter plasmid containing
NF-kB binding sites. Transcript levels of the IL-6 receptor or Gp130, essential for
IL-6 signal transduction were not altered by T3, but the hormone significantly
reduced stimulation by IL-6 of STAT target genes encoding acute-phase proteins,
which are key components of the hepatic response to the cytokine. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, T3 significantly reduced STAT3 recruitment to its
target promoters in response to IL-6. Moreover, IL-6 dependent increase of
acetylated histone H4, a marker of transcriptional activation, was also suppressed
by T3. Our results show that the thyroid hormones can counteract the cellular
responses to IL-6 reducing its transcriptional actions. Through this mechanism,
the thyroid hormones may modulate immune homeostasis and carcinogenesis in
the liver, suggesting that they could be important targets for developing new
therapeutic strategies for the treatment of liver diseases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP771
EP772
Effects of vitamin D on endothelial-derived factors implicated in the
atheromatic plaque vulnerability
Aspasia Rizou1, Narjes Nasiri-Ansari1, Eliana Spilioti1,
Vasiliki Kalotychou2, Paraskevi Moutsatsou1, Papavassiliou Athanasios1 &
Eva Kassi1
1National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School,
Department of Biochemistry, Athens, Greece;2National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Medical School, First Department of Internal
Medicine, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Although  the  protective  effects  of
1,25(OH)2D3
on  the  early  stages  of
atheromatosis process have been investigated, data on its influence on factors
implicated in plaque vulnerability are limited. During these stages metallopro-
teinases MMP-2, MMP-9, their inhibitors TIMP-1,TIMP-2, the RANKL-RANK-
OPG system and MCP-1 play a critical role. We aimed to investigate the effect of
vitamin D on the expression of the above factors on endothelial cells. Methods:
Human aortic endothelial cells (HAECs) were incubated with VitD for 24,
48,72 hours at a concentration range 10K8 - 10K11 in the absence of TNF-a or
with VitD for 24 hours in the presence of TNF-a at concentration 10ng/ml for the
last 6 hours. The mRNA expression of the aforementioned genes was assessed by
real time-PCR. Zymography for MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity was also performed.
OPG protein levels were also evaluated by western blot.
Results
VitD did not significantly change the expression of MMP-9, MMP-2, TIMP-1 and
TIMP-2 at mRNA level at various incubation times and concentrations. The
expression of OPG at mRNA was significantly increased in the presence of TNF-a
and this effect became more pronounced when cells were preincubated with Vit D
at concentration 10K9 M. Preincubation with p38 MAP kinase inhibitor totally
abolished this result.
When  cells  activated  with  TNF-a,  preincubation  with  Vit  D  resulted  in  a
significant decrease in MMP-9 expression at 10K10 and 10K11M and increase in
TIMP-2 expression while it didn’t affect the expression of MMP-2 and TIMP-1.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Gelatin zymography revealed that Vit D decrease the active MMP-2 dose-
dependently.
Conclusions
Vit D at physiologically achievable concentrations reduces the expression of
MMP-9 and induces the expression of TIMP-2 at mRNA level implying a possible
protective role in the later stages of atheromatosis, such as plaque vulnerability.
Further studies are needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP772
EP773
One third of obese children are diagnosed with neurodevelopmental
disorders
Jovanna Dahlgren2, Anna Bjork2 & Elisabet Wentz1
1Gillberg Neuropsychiatry Centre, Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden;2Goteborg
Pediatric Growth Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Institute of
Clinical Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Background
Child obesity has become a global health problem. The younger treatment starts
the better outcome, but few treatment modalities are efficient. Whether obese
children have an increased risk of neurodevelopmental disorders with worse
treatment outcome is not studied. Objectives: To investigate the prevalence of
ADHD, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and other neurodevelopmental disorders
in obese children. As a second objective gender differences were evaluated.
Methods
Seventy-six children (37 girls; 39 boys) were recruited at referral to a university
outpatient clinic. The parents were interviewed regarding the child’s psychiatric
morbidity using The development and well-being assessment, and completed
parental questionnaires such as The Autism Spectrum Screening Questionnaire/
ASQ14 and the Five to fifteen parent questionnaire all of these evaluating ADHD,
ASD and other neurodevelopmental disorders. The parents were screened for
adult ADHD using the Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale. Anthropometric and
metabolic data was collected at the first visit and after one year of conventional
life-style treatment.
Results
Twelve percent 1% and 18% of the children were diagnosed with ASD and
ADHD  respectively.  Thirty  percent  of  the  children  had  at  least  one
neurodevelopmental disorder and 20% had a parent who screened positive for
adult  ADHD.  There  was  statistically  significant  more  obese  males  with
neurodevelopmental disorders (P!0.05). In the total group, mean (SD) body
mass index (BMI) was 3.4 (0.6), insulin 31 (18.5) and age 12.4 (3.0), with a range
of 2-6 kg/m2, 6-110 and 5.1-16.5 years, respectively. There was no statistical
difference in mean BMI, insulin, age and other metabolic variables between those
obese children with neurodevelopmental disorders and without. No difference
was  found  in  treatment  outcome  after  one  year  between  those  with
neurodevelopmental disorders and without (delta BMI SDS 0.06 (0.36) versus
0.13
(0.33),  PZns).  Conclusion:  Neurodevelopmental  disorders  are  over-
represented  in  clinical  populations  of  obese  children,  especially  in  males.
Although we did not find any significant worse BMI outcome in those with
neurodevelopmental disorders, it should be taken into account that many parents
share  their  children’s  symptoms,  when  designing  educational  materials  for
parents.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP773
EP774
Optical isomers of statins enantiospecifically activate pregnane X
receptor PXR and induce CYP2A6, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 in human
hepatocytes
Martina Stepankova & Zdenek Dvorak
Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
Statins are drugs used for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia. Statins have two
chiral centers in their molecules, thus they form four enantiomers (3R5R-, 3R5S-,
3S5R- and 3S5S-). Regarding the most frequently prescribed statins, following
enantiopure formulations  are  used  in  the  clinics:
3R5R-atorvastatin,
3R5S-
rosuvastatin  and
3R5S-fluvastatin.  Individual  enantiomers  of  one  drug  can
qualitatively and quantitatively differ in their biological activities. In some cases,
only one enantiomer is responsible for the therapeutic effect, while the opposite
one may be inactive or can cause undesired or even toxic effects. Therefore, it is
of value to study in vitro effects of individual enantiomers.
We  investigated  enantiospecific  interactions  of  four  enantiopure  forms  of
atorvastin, rosuvastatin and fluvastatin with main transcriptional regulators of
drug-metabolizing enzymes - aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) and pregnane X receptor (PXR). Agonist and antagonist activities
of tested compounds towards AhR, PXR and GR were determined using human
reporter cell lines. Moreover, we have measured expression of drug-metabolizing
enzymes CYPs on mRNA and protein level in primary human hepatocytes.
Basal and ligand-inducible transcriptional activity of PXR was dose-dependently
influenced by all tested statins, and the potency and efficacy between individual
optical isomers varied depending on statin and optical isomer. Statins did not
influence the expression of CYP1A1/2 in human hepatocytes. All statins induced
CYP2A6, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4, and the effects on CYP2C9 were rather
modulatory. Overall, the potential for drug-drug interactions involving induction
of  P450s  was  higher  for  clinically  used  optical  isomers  of  rosuvastatin,
atorvastatin and fluvastatin, as compared to their respective enantiomers, which
are not in therapeutic use.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP774
EP775
The impact of mycophenolate mofetil on androgen receptor activity in
prostate cancer cells 22Rv1
Ondrej Zenata, Zdenek Dvorak & Radim Vrzal
Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
Mycophenolate mofetil (MYC) is widely used in transplant medicine as an
immunosuppressant drug to prevent rejection in organ transplantation. In this
work we investigated the effect of MYC on the activity of androgen receptor (AR)
by employing gene reporter assay (GRA) and PCR in prostate cancer cell line
22Rv1.
Slight but significant activation of AR was observed for cells treated with MYC in
stably transfected 22Rv1 cells (AIZ-AR). Moreover, significant stimulation of
dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-inducible AR-dependent luciferase activity by MYC
was observed. AR-target gene KLK3 (prostate specific antigen, PSA) mRNA was
induced dose-dependently and consistently with GRA. DHT-inducible KLK3
mRNA was increased by MYC as well. Since we found that MYC induced the
expression of KLK3 and activated AR, we investigated whether MYC affects the
proliferation of prostatic cells. However, we observed opposite effect of MYC on
proliferation. Only two lowest concentrations of MYC had positive effect on cell
proliferation, but for 24h only, not for 48 hrs.
In conclusion, we found that MYC is an activator of AR and induced KLK3
mRNA  in  the prostate  cancer  cell  line 22Rv1.  However, we  did  not  find
correlation between AR activation by MYC and cell proliferation. In any case,
herein  we  provide  important  findings  which  bring  new  information  about
mechanism of action of mycophenolate mofetil on AR.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP775
EP776
Effect of anthocyanidins on trascriptional activities of steroid and
nuclear receptors
Barbora Pastorkova, Peter Illes & Zdenek Dvorak
Palacky University Olomouc, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics,
Olomouc, Czech Republic.
Anthocyanidins  are  aglycons  of  anthocyanins,  which  are  plant  pigments
responsible  for  floral  and  fruits  color.  Anthocyanidins  possess  beneficial
pharmacological properties such as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor
and anti-diabetic. Anthocyanidins are contained in normal diet and might play
role in food-drug interactions.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
The aim of current study was to evaluate the effects of cyanidin, delphinidin,
malvidin, pelargonidin and peonidin on the transcriptional activities of steroid
and nuclear receptors.
The activities of glucocorticoid receptor (GR), androgen receptor (AR), estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), thyroid receptor (TR), vitamin D
receptor (VDR), pregnane X receptor (PXR), retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and
retinoid X receptor
(RXR) were assessed using either stably or transiently
transfected luciferase gene reporter cell lines. The cytotoxicity assays and gene
reporter assays were performed after the 24-h treatment of cells with increasing
range of concentrations (10 nM - 50 mM) of tested anthocyanidins.
We  found  that  some  anthocyanidins  in
50 mM  concentration  inhibited
transcriptional activity of examined receptors. The inhibition down-to 49.4%
for malvidin vs VDR, 49.3% for delphinidin vs RXR, 38.0% for malvidin vs RAR
and 52.2% for pelargonidin vs PXR of maximal induction was observed.
Generally, certain tested anthocyanidins in the highest concentration inhibited
transcriptional activity of studied receptors and none of the tested anthocyanidins
in given  concentration  range  caused  significant induction  of  transcriptional
activity of examined receptors.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP776
Obesity
EP777
A prostate cancer risk associated polymorphism regulates androgen
mediated regulation of a novel long noncoding RNA, IRX4lncRNA
Janaththani Panchadsaram1,2, Gregor Tevz1,2, Nataly Stylianou1,2,
Brett Hollier1,2, Colleen Nelson1,2, Elizabeth Williams1,2,
Judith Clements1,2 & Jyotsna Batra1,2
1Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centre - Queensland (APCRC-Q),
Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia;2School of Biomedical
Sciences, Institute of Health & Biomedical Innovation, Queensland
University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cause of cancer death in
developed countries. Our RNAseq analysis identified a novel long non-coding
RNA, IRX4lncRNA at chromosome 5p15. The expression of IRX4lncRNA was
much higher in prostate tumor samples (nZ50) compared to their matched
controls. Moreover, knockdown of lncRNA reduced the cell proliferation of
LNCaP cells and this lncRNA was down-regulated in the cells undergoing
Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), which is a hallmark of PCa
invasion.
Interestingly, differential regulation of IRX4lncRNA by androgens was observed
in VCaP (up-regulated) and LNCaP (down-regulated) cells. In-silico analysis
(Cistrome Finder Database) identified binding of two crucial transcription factors-
AR and ERG, at this locus in VCaP cells and no AR binding in LNCaP cells (ERG
negative). We also noted a correlation between IRX4lncRNA expression and ERG
fusion in our RNA-sequencing data of a cohort of seven androgen-responsive
patient-derived xenografts. Sequencing of this AR/ERG binding region identified
a Multiple Nucleotide Length Polymorphism (MNLP, rs38668493) where a
stretch of 47bp sequence is replaced by a novel 21bp sequence. VCaP cells have
an  intact  AR/ERG  binding  site
(47bp/47bp)  whereas  LNCaP  cells  have  a
disrupted AR/ERG binding site (21bp/21bp) which may explain the differential
androgen responsiveness of IRX4lncRNA. This MNLP is in linkage disequlibrium
(LD)  with  the  previously  identified  PCa  risk  associated  SNP,  rs10866528,
suggesting this MNLP may possibly be the functional genetic variant at this locus
and guiding the AR/ERG binding to this locus and therefore, directing the
androgen-mediated regulation of IRX4lncRNA. We are currently focusing on
establishing the functional role of this MNLP in PCa.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP777
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP778
Is Pentraxin 3 a marker in pathogenesis of central obesity?
Ozen Dedeoglu1, Guzin Yaylali2, Fulya Akin2, Senay Topsakal2,
Suleyman Demir3 & Hande Senol4
1Pamukkale University, Department of Internal Medicine, Denizli, Turkey;
2Pamukkale University, Department of Endocrinology, Denizli, Turkey;
3Pamukkale University, Department of Biochemistry, Denizli, Turkey;
4Pamukkale University, Department of Biostatistics, Denizli, Turkey.
Introduction
Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is an acute-phase protein that shares structural homology with
C-reactive protein (CRP). PTX3 is produced in macrophages, endothelial cells,
and adipocytes in response to inflammatory stimuli, whereas hepatocytes are the
main source of CRP. Because obesity and metabolic syndrome (MetS) are
considered  chronic  inflammatory  states,  PTX3
might  be  involved  in  the
pathogenesis of obesity and MetS as well as CRP. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the relationships between PTX3, CRP, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio
(NLR) and BMI.
Methods
86 obese premenapousal women (aged 17-55 years) and 56 women with normal
BMI took  part  in  this  study.  Antropometric  measurements  including  waist
circumferences
(WC)  were  done.  Serum  concentrations  of  plasma  fasting
glucose, insulin, Pentraxin 3, CRP, complete blood count were measured. NLR
was calculated. HOMA-R is also calculated to determine insulin resistance.
Obese
Control
P
PTX3 (Pentraxin 3) (pg/mL)
0.83
0.86
0.887
CRP (C-reaktive protein) (mg/dL)
0.68
0.38
0.000
Neutrophil (K/uL)
4.5
4.1
0.039
Lmphocyte (K/uL)
2.3
2
0.001
Neutrophil lymphocyte ratio
2
2.1
0.492
Results
PTX3 and NLR were similar in both groups. PTX3 and NLR were also similar
in obese patients with or without insulin resistance. CRP is significantly higher in
obese patients (P ! 0.01). It was also significantly higher in insulin resistance
obese patients (P ! 0.01). There was’nt any correlation between BMI or any of
the inflamatory markers. Multiple regression analysis showed that PTX3 is
correlated with WC.
Conclusion
Although PTX3 levels were not determinative in obese patients and has no
correlation with body fat, it may have a relation with central obesity. To clarify
this further studies are needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP778
EP779
Skin autofluorescence is associated with the metabolic syndrome and its
individual components
Robert van Waateringe1, Sandra Slagter1, Jana van Vliet-Ostaptchouck1,
Reindert Graaff1, Melanie van der Klauw1, Andrew Paterson1,2,
Helen Lutgers1 & Bruce Wolffenbuttel1
1University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands;2The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
Background
Skin autofluorescence (SAF) has been demonstrated to be associated with long-
term cardiovascular complications in subjects with either diabetes or renal failure.
Since the metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease,
the aim of the study was to assess the association between SAF and MetS as well
as its individuals components.
Materials and methods
For this cross-sectional analysis, we included subjects 18-80 years of age who
participated in the LifeLines Cohort Study. We excluded 2411 subjects who were
known to have either type 1 or type 2 diabetes and/or had a serum creatinine
O140 mmol/l, and included subjects who had SAF measurements available,
leaving
78.799
individuals  for  analyses.  Skin  autofluorescence
(SAF)  was
measured non-invasively with the AGE Reader in all participants (Diagnoptics
BV, Groningen, The Netherlands). MetS was defined according to the revised
NCEP ATP III criteria.
Results
From the total population, 11.619 (15%) subjects were diagnosed with MetS.
Subjects with MetS were significantly older but had a higher creatinine clearance
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(both P!0.001) compared to individuals without MetS. Subjects with MetS
(2.01G0.24) had a higher SAF than those without MetS (1.90G0.25) (P!0.001)
even after adjusting for age. Furthermore, there was a gradual increase of SAF Z
scores (adjusted for age) with increasing number of MetS components (P!0.001).
Finally, the prevalence of particularly raised blood pressure and enlarged waist
circumference increased with higher SAF.
Conclusion
We have demonstrated that higher SAF levels are strongly associated with an
increased prevalence of MetS and its individuals components, in particular raised
blood pressure and enlarged waist circumference. When taking these and previous
observations on SAF with different clinically relevant phenotypes into account,
the AGE Reader could be potentially used as an (additional) screening tool to
identify individuals at high risk for developing metabolic and cardiovascular
complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP779
EP780
Glucose and insulin up-regulate the cardiovascular biomarker GDF15
in vivo and in vitro: effect of meal content and obesity
Marie Helene Schernthaner-Reiter, Dominik Kasses, Christina Tugendsam,
Michaela Riedl, Slobodan Peric, Martin Clodi, Anton Luger & Greisa Vila
Clinical Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine III, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Introduction
Growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) has recently been characterized as a
cardiovascular risk factor. GDF15 correlates with insulin resistance and obesity in
cross-sectional studies and exerts anorexigenic effects in interventional rodent
studies. GDF15 has been proposed as a possible therapeutic target in the treatment
of obesity, however its meal- and nutrient-dependent regulation in humans has not
been investigated previously.
Methods
Profiles  of  GDF15
plasma  concentrations  were  studied  in  lean  and  obese
individuals in response to carbohydrate-rich and fat-rich meals, a 75 g oral
glucose load (OGTT) or fasting. Human hepatic HepG2 cells were stimulated
with glucose- and insulin, and the effects on GDF15 mRNA levels and protein
release in the supernatant were evaluated.
Results
In lean and obese individuals, fasting was associated with a steady decrease in
plasma GDF15 concentrations. OGTT inhibited this decrease with GDF15 rising
back to baseline levels 2-3 hours after glucose ingestion, while carbohydrate- and
fat-rich meals did not have a significant effect. In HepG2 cells, glucose and
insulin independently stimulate GDF15 transcription as well as secretion.
Conclusion
GDF-15 decreases during fasting and increases in response to high peaks in
glucose and insulin concentrations following oral glucose ingestion in men. These
changes are, at least in part, mediated via direct effects of glucose and insulin on
GDF15 transcription and release. These data provide the first evidence on
nutrient-related changes in GDF-15 concentrations in humans.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP780
EP781
Bariatric surgery: a health economic perspective of the prescription
costs
Sílvia Paredes, Maria Lopes Pereira, Aline Fernandes, Fernando Manso,
Maia da Costa, Olinda Marques & Marta Alves
Hospital de Braga, Braga, Portugal.
Introduction
The economic burden of obesity on healthcare systems is increasing. Bariatric
surgery leads to considerable weight loss and health improvement. However, this
surgery is costly and doubts about its affordability have been raised. Few studies
have assessed outcomes such as drug use and costs after bariatric surgery. The
aim of this study was to evaluate drug consumption and costs before and after
bariatric surgery.
Methods
Retrospectively, databases of 72 patients who underwent bariatric surgery in 2014
were analyzed. Therapies and comorbidities related to obesity were reviewed
preoperatively and at 6 months postoperatively. Drug prices were calculated
accordingly to table prices of the National Health Service.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
Pre and postoperatively prevalence of comorbidities related to obesity were
respectively: hypertension 38.9% vs 20.8% (P!0.001 McNemar test); type 2
diabetes 19.4% vs 9.7% (PZ0.016 McNemar test); dyslipidemia 58.3% vs 33.3%
(PZ0.001 McNemar test); and sleep apnea 11.1% vs 4.17% (PZ0,125 McNemar
test). A sub-analysis of patients treated for these comorbidities (nZ33) has shown
that, preoperatively, costs related to drug and continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) use were on average 1.26V/patient/day, whereas postoperatively these
costs  were  on  average
0.53V/patient/day
(PZ0.015  Paired  sample  t-test).
Preoperatively, the median number of pills and insulin dose per patient per day
was 2 and 60, while postoperatively these numbers decreased to 1 and 43,
respectively (PZ0.002; PZ0.043 Wilcoxon test). These patients exhibited an
improvement in their comorbidities which, remaining stable, could reimburse the
costs of the bariatric surgery in 23 years.
Conclusion
Bariatric surgery can decrease medication requirements, resulting in significant
cost savings to the National Health Service. This surgery is pricey, but the
decrease of expenditures in prescription costs may allow a reimbursement of the
investment,  and  this  is  more  evident  in  patients  with  more  associated
comorbidities.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP781
EP782
Dietary and social factors associated to obesity among greek
adolescent girls
Ioanna Leontaridou1, Lydia Moutsiou1, Paschalia K. Iliadou2,
Maria Somali1, Anastasia-Konstantina Sakali3, Maria Papagianni4,
George Mastorakos3, Dimitrios G. Goulis2 & Zadalla Mouslech1,5
1Department of Aesthetics and Cosmetology, Alexander Technological
Educational Institute of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece;2Unit of
Reproductive Endocrinology, First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecol-
ogy of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Papageorgiou Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Greece;3Unit of Endocrinology, Diabetes Mellitus and
Metabolism, Second Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of National
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Aretaieio Hospital, Athens, Greece;
4Unit of Pediatric Endocrinology, Third Department of Pediatrics of
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Hippokration Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece;5First Propaedeutic Internal Medicine Department of Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Ahepa Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Objectives
To estimate the body mass index (BMI) distribution among Greek female
adolescents in 2012 and to compare it with data from 2000, to find associations of
obesity with dietary and social factors, as well as to determine the prevalence of
acne, hirsutism and menstrual irregularities in the same population.
Methods
All female students (nZ380) aged 12-18 years of two randomly selected high
schools, after obtaining a written consent from their parents, underwent clinical
evaluation and completed a questionnaire on their dietary habits, medical history
and the educational and occupational level of their parents. Data collected in 2000
from a group of 2300 Greek female adolescents was used for comparison.
Statistical analysis of the sample characteristics was performed.
Results
The percentages of normal, overweight and obese adolescent girls were 73.7%,
22.1%, and 4.2% respectively. The corresponding results in the control group of
adolescent girls in 2000 were 81.87%, 14.48% and 3.65% respectively. Overall,
differences in the BMI distribution were not statistically significant between 2000
and 2012 (PZ0.4341). There was no difference in specific meal consumption
among BMI categories. Higher BMI was associated with a mother of a lower
social status (58.3% vs 41.6%, PZ0.037). The prevalence of hirsutism and acne
in the studied population was 11.6% and 36.3% respectively. Eighty three of the
349  girls  who  had  attained  menarche
(24%)  were  experiencing  menstrual
irregularities. No relationship was found between BMI and the prevalence of
acne, hirsutism, menstrual disturbances and polycystic ovary syndrome diagnosis.
Conclusions
Despite a slight increase, during the last decade, in the percentage of overweight
and obese Greek adolescent girls, this trend was not statistically significant.
Among the parameters studied, the only predictor of adolescent obesity was found
to be the educational and occupational level of the mother.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP782
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP783
Relationship between lipopolysaccharide levels and the gene expression
profile in adipose tissue from morbidly obese patients
Mercedes Clemente-Postigo, Leticia Coin-Araguez, Wilfredo
Oliva-Olivera, Juan Alcaide-Torres, Jose-Carlos Fernandez-Garcia,
Fernando Cardona & Francisco J Tinahones
Unidad de Gestión Clínica Endocrinología y Nutrición, Instituto de
Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Complejo Hospitalario de
Málaga (Virgen de la Victoria)/Universidad de Málaga, CIBER Fisio,
Malaga, Spain.
Introduction
Obesity is characterized by a low-grade inflammatory state which has been
directly related to the development of insulin resistance and diabetes. Circulating
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) have been proposed as a triggering factor for this
inflammation. Likewise, adipose tissue (AT) capacity for lipid handling and
storage is also a key factor for the development of obesity-related metabolic
disorders. Animal studies have shown that LPS are able to modify the expression
of key factors for AT function. Thus, the aim of this study was to analyze the gene
expression of key factors for AT function and inflammation in AT from morbidly
obese (MO) patients according to their LPS levels.
Methods
Visceral and subcutaneous AT (VAT and SAT) samples were obtained during
bariatric surgery from 70 MO patients to measure mRNA levels. Plasma LPS
levels as well as biochemical and anthropometric variables were measured.
Patients were classified according to their LPS levels (high LPS levels, H-LPS
group and low-LPS levels, L-LPS group). Gene expression was also analyzed
after in vitro stimulation with LPS of AT explants from MO patients.
Results
H-LPS group showed higher mRNA levels of inflammatory genes (TLR2, CSF3
and IL6 in VAT; TLR2, MCP1, CSF3 and CD14 in SAT) than L-LPS group. By
contrast, H-LPS group had lower mRNA levels of factors related to AT function
(FABP4, SREBP1, FASN and Leptin in VAT and FABP4 in SAT). In vitro
stimulation with LPS led to an increase in gene expression of inflammatory
markers (TLR2, IL6, CSF3 and MCP1) and a decrease in the gene expression of
factors related to AT function (PPARg, SREBP1, FASN, FABP4, SCD and
leptin) in VAT.
Conclusions
Circulating LPS can influence AT physiology in morbidly obese patients by
decreasing the gene expression of key factors for AT function and by increasing
the gene expression of inflammatory markers.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP783
EP784
The circulating fingerprint revealed by targeted metabolomic as
biomarker of metabolic impairment in female overweight/obesity
Marco Mezzullo1, Flaminia Fanelli1, Alessia Fazzini1, Margherita Baccini1,
Elena Casadio1, Daniela Ibarra-Gasparini1, Roberta Mazza1,
Valentina Vicennati1, Luca Fontanesi2, Renato Pasquali1 & Uberto Pagotto1
1Endocrinology Unit and Centro di Ricerca Biomedica Applicata,
Department of Medical and Surgical Science, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy;2Department of Agricultural and
Food Sciences, Division of Animal Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.
The  comprehension  of  the  network  of  metabolic  processes  may  help  the
understanding of the molecular pathways driving obesity and related compli-
cations. However this is a hard task due to the large number of actors and their
complex  interplay.  We  aimed  at  exploring  by  targeted  metabolomic  the
circulating metabolite profile in lean (NW, nZ42; BMI: 18.5-24.9 kg/m2) and
age-matched overweight/obese (OB, nZ37, BMIR25.0 kg/m2), drug-free adult
overnight-fasted women. Anthropometric, biochemical and hormonal data were
collected. One-hundred-eighty molecules among aminoacids, biogenic amines,
acylcarnitines, phosphatidyl-choline (PC), lysoposphatidyl-choline (LysoPC) and
sphingomyeline (SM) were quantified by the Absolute p180 LC-MS/MS Kit
(Biocrates Life Science AG). BMI effect on metabolite profile was investigated
by  the  orthogonal  partial  least  squares-discriminant  analysis
(OPLS-DA),
resulting in the selection of 39 metabolites driving the NW vs OB separation
(R2XZ0.485, R2YZ0.638, Q2YZ0.505, CV-ANOVA P!0.001). Then, the
association between the metabolite model and the individual parameters of
metabolic impairment was investigated. The BMI-adjusted stepwise multiple
regression  analysis  revealed  the  following  independent  associations:  waist
circumference was positively associated to Glu (PZ0.040) and Val (P!0.001)
and  negatively  to  PCaa-C42:2
and  LysoPC-C18:2
(P!0.001).  Glycaemia
positively  correlated  with  Ala
(PZ0.025)  and  SM-C18:0  (PZ0.008),  and
negatively with PCae-C34:3 (PZ0.004). Insulin positively correlated with Val
(PZ0.002) and negatively with PCae-C34:2 (PZ0.001). HOMA-index was
positively associated to Tyr (P!0.001) and negatively to PCae-C34:2 (PZ0.001).
Triglycerides showed a positive correlation with PCaa-C24:0 (PZ0.036) and
PCaa-C38:3 (P!0.001) and negative correlation with PCae-C32:1 (PZ0.007)
and PCae-C36:3 (PZ0.012). HDL were positively associated to PCae-C34:3
(P!0.001) and LysoPC-C20:4 (PZ0.038) and negatively associated to Val
(P!0.001). Finally, total cholesterol positively correlated with SM-C18:0 (PZ
0.008), SM(OH)-C22:1 (PZ0.024) and PCaaC38:3 (P!0.001) and negatively
correlated with Tyr (P!0.001). The targeted metabolomic approach allowed the
identification of a specific metabolic fingerprint in female non-complicated
obesity that should be further explored as early biomarker of dysmetabolism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP784
EP785
Interventional changes of thyroid hormone levels do not affect
circulating irisin levels in humans
Grigorios Panagiotou1,2, Kalliopi Pazaitou-Panayiotou2,
Despina Komninou2, Stavroula A. Paschou1,3, Nikolaos Kalogeris3,
Andromachi Vryonidou3 & Christos S. Mantzoros1
1Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of
Internal Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA;2Department of Endocrinology- Endocrine
Oncology, Theagenio Cancer Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;3Department
of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Hellenic Red Cross Hospital, Athens,
Greece.
Introduction
Thyroid hormones and irisin increase energy expenditure and induce browning of
adipose tissue. However, little is known about irisin physiology and regulation.
Here we aim to elucidate whether thyroid hormones alter circulating irisin
concentrations in humans.
Design and subjects
One  cross-sectional
(case-control)  evaluation  and  two  interventions  were
performed independently from each other, including previously thyroidectomized
patients. Case-control study: Ninety-six subjects under thyroxine treatment, were
recruited to study any associations between anthropometric parameters, thyroid
axis hormones and irisin and then divided into a “euthyroid” and a “subclinical
hyperthyroid” group, based on their Thyroid Stimulating Hormone levels (TSH
cut-off value of 0.3 mIU/L). Interventional Study A: Thirty-four patients that were
followed-up for thyroid cancer, were studied during a 5-week withdrawal from
L-T4 treatment, according to a standardized routine protocol for preparation for
whole body scan and/or thyroglobulin measurement. Blood samples were drawn
at baseline and at the end of the study period. Interventional Study B: Thirteen
patients underwent a recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) stimulation protocol and
without receiving radioactive iodine for whole body scan and blood samples were
drawn at baseline, day 3 (i.e. at least 24 hours after the second intramuscular
injection), day 5 and day 10.
Results
Serum irisin levels were not cross-sectionally associated with anthropometric
parameters as well as TSH, free thyroxine and free triidothyronine, in either the
whole cohort or in the euthyroid and/or subclinical hyperthyroid subgroups. There
was no significant difference between euthyroid and subclinical hyperthyroid
subjects (PZ0.60). L-T4 withdrawal did not alter irisin levels (PZ0.33). The
effect of rhTSH stimulation on circulating irisin was also null (PZ0.60).
Conclusions
Changes  of  thyroid  hormone  levels  within  the  physiological  or  mildly
supraphysiological  range  do  not  affect  circulating  irisin  levels  in  humans.
Therefore, irisin proposed metabolic effects are most likely independent from
thyroid axis hormones.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP785
EP786
Chemerin correlates with obesity and metabolic syndrome and
decreases after weight loss in children
Xinrui Tan, Min Li & Yanfeng Xiao
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China.
Introduction
Chemerin is a pro-inflammatory adipokine, which has been shown as a mediator
between obesity and metabolic syndrome (MetS). The aim of this study was to
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
evaluate the associations of chemerin with insulin resistance and the effects of
lifestyle interventions on circulating chemerin levels in Chinese obese children.
Methods
A cross-sectional study was conducted among 225 obese children (101 with MetS
and 124 without MetS) and 119 lean controls, and a lifestyle intervention was
performed in a subgroup of 60 obese children for 6 months. Anthropometric
parameters,  clinical  data  and  circulating  adipokines
(chemerin,  leptin  and
adiponectin) levels were measured at baseline and after lifestyle intervention.
Results
Chemerin was significantly higher in obese children, especially in those with
MetS [(96.8G10.2) ng/ml vs. (104.7G15.1) ng /ml vs. (113.6G10.6) ng/ml, P !
0.01], and negatively correlated with body mass index (BMI) (rZ0.45, P ! 0.01),
waist circumference (rZ0.38, P ! 0.01) and homeostasis model assessment of
insulin resistance (rZ0.41, P ! 0.01). Independent of other well-known risk
factors,  chemerin  was  a  significant  predictor  of  MetS  in  children.  In  the
longitudinal study, lifestyle intervention led to significant weight loss and lower
chemerin levels [(114.9G17.2) ng/ml vs. (102.8G11.1) ng/ml, P ! 0.01].
Furthermore,  changes  in  BMI  significantly  correlated  with  the  decreasing
magnitude of chemerin (rZ0.35, PZ0.01).
Conclusion
Serum chemerin is regulated by weight status and seems to be correlated with
metabolic disorders in Chinese children.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP786
EP787
Reduced expression of chemerin in visceral adipose tissue associates
with hepatic steatosis in obese patients
Marlies Bekaert1, D Margriet Ouwens2,3, Tina Horbelt2,3, Frederique Van de
Velde1,3, Yves Van Nieuwenhove4, Patrick Calders5, Marleen Praet6,
Anja Geerts7, Xavier Verhelst7, Jean-Marc Kaufman1 & Bruno Lapauw1
1Department of Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium;2Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry,
German Diabetes Center, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany;3German Center for
Diabetes Research (DZD), 85764 Munchen-Neuherberg, Germany;
4Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Ghent University Hospital,
9000 Ghent, Belgium;5Revalidation Science and Physiotherapy, Ghent
University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium;6Department of Pathology,
Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium;7Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium.
Aims
Emerging data indicate that an impaired release of adipose tissue-derived adipokines
could play a pivotal role in the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD). We aimed to evaluate whether circulating levels or visceral adipose tissue
(VAT) expression of recently described adipokines associate with the histopatho-
logical disease severity and thus may contribute to the progression of pure fatty liver
into an inflammatory and insulin resistant NASH status.
Methods
Serum levels of omentin, chemerin, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)
and Secreted frizzled-related protein (Sfrp) 4 were measured using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in 81 obese patients with biopsy-proven NAFLD
and 18 lean control subjects. Expression of the adipokines in VAT was measured
using real-time PCR analysis and histopathological grading of NAFLD was scored
using the NAFLD activity score (NAS) as verified by Brunt et al.
Results
While  VAT  expression  of  omentin  and  Sfrp
4
(PZ0.043  and  P!0.001;
respectively) as well as serum levels of chemerin (PZ0.020) were higher in
NAFLD patients compared to controls, adipokine levels did not differ when
NAFLD patients were subdivided into groups with simple steatosis, borderline
NASH and NASH. Although BMI was similar among NAFLD subgroups, NAS
was associated with HOMA-IR independent of age and BMI (bZ0.282; PZ0.020).
Serum adipokine levels were associated neither with histopathological disease
severity, nor with their VAT expression. Chemerin VAT expression however, was
negatively  associated  with  NAS
(rZK0.331,  PZ0.022)  and  steatosis  score
(rZK0.335, PZ0.020). Importantly, these associations remained significant when
adjusting for age, BMI and HOMA-IR. Furthermore, chemerin VAT expression was
significantly lower in patients with moderate or severe steatosis (O33%) versus
patients with mild steatosis (!33%; PZ0.016).
Conclusion
These  findings  suggest  a  protective  role  of  locally  distributed  VAT-derived
chemerin during the pathophysiology of hepatic steatosis and confirm the pivotal
role of insulin resistance in NAFLD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP787
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP788
Mean platelet volume in a patient with celiac disease: the relationship
between metabolic syndrome, impaired fasting glucose and
cardiovascular risk
Handan Cipil1, Idris Baydar2, Konca Altinkaynak3, Esra Ademoglu4,
Esra Laloglu5, Murat Filiz2, Ahmet Veli Sanibas2, Faruk Yildiz2,
Hakan Sevimli2, Muttalip Arslan2, Senay Arikan6 & Ayse Carlioglu7
1Selcuk University Faculty of Medicine Department of Hematology, Konya,
Turkey;2Erzurum Regional Training and Research Hospital Department of
İnternal Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey;3Erzurum Regional Training and
Research Hospital Department of Biochemistry, Erzurum, Turkey;4Bolu
University Faculty of Medicine, Bolu, Turkey;5Erzurum Laboratory of
Public Health, Erzurum, Turkey;6Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine
Department of Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kirikkale,
Turkey;7Erzurum Regional Training and Research Hospital Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Erzurum, Turkey.
Celiac Disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory disorder and requires life-long
treatment and follow-up. Mean platelet volume (MPV), determinant of platelet
function,  is  an  independent  risk  factor  for  cardiovascular  disease
(CVD).
Metabolic syndrome (MS) is a multiplex risk factor that arises from insulin
resistance accompanying abnormal adipose deposition and function. It is a risk
factor for coronary heart disease, as well as for diabetes, fatty liver, and several
cancers.
The aim of this study was to evaluate MPV and RDW values in CD patients and
the relationships between MPV, RDW, MS, impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and
cardiovascular risk.
Thirty-six CD patients (mean age 29.28G13.35 years) and 30 healthy control
individuals (mean age 31.56G10.54 years) were included in the study. CD
patients adhered to a strict gluten-free diet and at least one year are diagnosed.
The controls were matched to cases according to age, gender and BMI. A
diagnosis of CD was established by positive antibodies against gliadin and/or
endomysium and confirmed with histological findings of duodenum biopsy based
on modified Marsh classification.
MPV and RDW levels were significantly higher in CD patients than control group
(P!0.001 both). CD patients had significantly more often MS than control group
(PZ0.007). Patients with MS had significantly higher MPV and RDW compared
to those without MS (PZ0.004 vs. PZ0.042 respectively).
These results suggest that CD patients are susceptible to increased platelet
activation and increased MPV and RDW values that contribute to an increased
risk of cardiovascular complications. The results may have clinical importance,
because the parameters indicating inflammation in MS may be the early markers
of developing cardiovascular events.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP788
EP789
Intergenerational influence of paternal obesity on metabolic and
reproductive health of the offspring: male-preferential impact and
potential involvement of Kiss1-mediated pathways
Miguel Ángel Sánchez-Garrido1,2, Francisco Ruiz-Pino1,2,
Alexia Barroso1,2, Inmaculada Velasco1, Violeta Heras1, María Jesús
Vázquez1,2, Juan Manuel Castellano1,2, Juan Roa1,2, Leonor Pinilla1,2 &
Manuel Tena-Sempere1,2
1Department of Cellular Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Univeristy
of Córdoba & Maimónides Institute of Biomedical Research of Córdoba
(IMIBIC), Córdoba, Spain;2CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y
Nutricion (CIBEROBN). Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Córdoba, Spain.
Obesity  and  its  comorbidities  are  reaching  epidemic  proportions.  Maternal
obesity  is  known  to  predispose  the  offspring  to  metabolic  disorders,
independently of genetic inheritance. This intergenerational transmission has
also been suggested for paternal obesity during the pre-conception stage, as it
appears to have a negative impact on the metabolic and reproductive health of the
offspring,  likely  via  epigenetic changes  in  spermatozoa.  However, whether
paternal obesity sensitizes the offspring to the disturbances induced by high fat
diet
(HFD)  remains  poorly  defined.  We  report  herein  the  metabolic  and
reproductive impact of HFD in the offspring from obese fathers, with special
attention to potential sex differences and alterations of hypothalamic Kiss1
system. Lean and extremely obese male rats were mated with lean, virgin female
rats; male and female offspring from lean and obese fathers were fed HFD from
weaning onwards. At postnatal day 120, the offspring were euthanized and several
metabolic and reproductive parameters analyzed. The increase in body weight
and leptin levels, but not glucose intolerance, induced by HFD were significantly
higher in the male offspring from obese fathers. In contrast, no differences were
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
detected in the female offspring from both paternal groups; actually, glucose
intolerance was lower in HFD-fed females from obese fathers. Paternal obesity
caused a decrease in LH levels and exacerbated the drop in testosterone caused by
HFD, which was associated to reduced testicular expression of key enzymes of
testosterone biosynthesis. In addition, LH responses to central kisspeptin-10
administration were suppressed in HFD-fed males from obese fathers. In contrast,
paternal obesity did not significantly alter gonadotropin levels in HFD females;
yet, LH responses to kisspeptin-10 were dramatically reduced in the female
offspring from obese fathers. Our findings suggest that HFD-induced metabolic
and reproductive disturbances are exacerbated by paternal obesity, mainly in
males, while kisspeptin actions are affected in both sexes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP789
EP790
Micronutrients status in bariatric patients-middle term follow-up for
Sleeve Gastrectomy
Ioana Hristov1, Veronica Mocanu1, Luminita Labusca3,
Florin Zugun-Eloae4, Delia Ciobanu5 & Daniel Timofte2
1Department of Pathophysiology UMF IASI, Iasi, Romania;2Department of
Surgery UMF IASI, Iasi, Romania;3Orthopaedic Surgery Service, St
Spiridon Hospital, Iasi, Romania;4Immunology Department UMF IASI,
Iasi, Romania;5Pathology Department UMF IASI, Iasi, Romania.
Introduction
Sleeve gastrectomy is a highly effective bariatric technique for morbidly obese
patients thus nutritional deficiencies resulting need routine screening for proper
evaluation.
Aim
Little is still known about the nutritional side-effects for this restrictive bariatric
procedure and our study aims to evaluate the impact of sleeve gastrectomy on
micronutrients status.
Methods
Our  prospective  study  included
48
morbidly  obese  patients  undergoing
laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG), with a mean age of 39.1 years and
mean BMI: 43.5 kg/m2. Serum level for nutritional parameters were evaluated:
25OHvitamin D, Vitamin B12 and folic acid.
Results
Baseline evaluation/6 months post-bariatric surgery (available for 16 patients):
Correction for de nutritional deficiencies was realised, and supplementation
continued after the bariatric procedure.
†  Mean level of Vitamin B12 was stable: 326 pg/ml at baseline and 298.5 pg/ml
at the 6 months follow-up; Vitamin B12 deficiency (!193 pg/ml) was found
in
7/47(14.9%) patients  and
6 months  post-bariatric  surgery  evaluation
showed persistent deficiency in 2/16 patients (12.5%);
†  Mean level of Folic acid at baseline: 5.88 ng/ml was maintained in the normal
range (NO3 ng/ml) with minimal reduction at the 6 months evaluation: 4.43
ng/ml; Folic acid deficiency was objectified in 5/48 cases (10.4%) and was
persistent in 1/16 patients (6.25%)
†  The initial evaluation:average 25-hydroxy vitamin D (25OHD) levelZ16.75
ng/ml with significant correction to 20.78 ng/ml at the 6 months follow-up;
Vitamin D insufficiency (!30 ng/mL) and vitamin D deficiency (!20
ng/mL) were present in in 28/31 patients (90.32%) respectively in 22/31
patients (70.96%); The prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency and deficiency
were significantly improved to only 8/15(53.33%) and 6/15(40%) patients.
Conclusions
The  level  of  nutrients was  maintained  at  normal  mean  levels  after  sleeve
gastrectomy and our preliminary data show the correction of nutrient deficiencies
in most of the cases were possible in a short follow-up term (6 months).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP790
EP791
Menopause and obesity
Fafa Nadira1,2, Meskine Djamila1,2, Fedala Saida1,2 & Kedad Lamia1,2
1Laboratory of Endocrinology And Metabolism, Algiers, Algeria;2Ibn Ziri
Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Introduction
Many studies have shown that the transition to menopause or peri menopause that
begins with onset of menstrual irregularities and ends with the last menstrual
period, was often associated with changes in body composition and specifically
central distribution of adipose tissue.
The objective is this study is to determine the prevalence of global and android
obesity in postmenopausal women compared to premenopausal women in the
general population.
Methodology
Descriptive and analytical cross-sectional study conducted among 1583 women
aged between 18 and 64 years living in households Algiers drawn at random by
the National Statistics Office. 39.9% of postmenopausal women are obese (BMI
R 30 kg/m2) while only 26.1% of premenopausal women are obese. %) (P !
0.0001). In multivariate analysis menopause does not appear to be a risk factor for
global obesity OR 0.79 (95% CI 0.58 to 1.09) PZ0.159, whereas it is a risk factor
of abdominal obesity OR Z1.73 (1.11 to 2.71) PZ0.016.
Our results are supported by many studies that showed an acceleration in
abdominal fat accumulation measured by DEXA and computed tomography.
Conclusion
All these studies suggest that the increased incidence of cardiovascular disease in
postmenopausal women could be attributed to the increase in visceral fat.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP791
EP792
Waist-to-hip ratio is the most discriminative parameter detecting
OGTT alterations in men
Belén Pérez-Pevida1, Patricia Andrada1, María Llavero-Valero2,
Gutiérrez-Buey Gala2, Nún˜ ez-Córdoba Jorge3,4, Gómez-Ambrosi Javier1,4,
Silva Camilo1,4, Galofré Juan Carlos2,4, Salvador Javier1,4,
Fruhbeck Gema1,4 & Escalada Javier2,4
1Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition. Metabolic Research Labora-
tory, CIBEROBN, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Clínica Universidad de
Navarra., Pamplona, Spain;2Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition.
Clínica Universidad de Navarra., Pamplona, Spain;3Division of Biostatis-
tics, Research Support Service, Central Clinical Trials Unit, Clínica
Universidad de Navarra. Department of Preventive Medicine and Public
Health, Medical School, Universidad de Na, Pamplona, Spain;4Navarra
Institute for Health Research (IdiSNA), Pamplona, Spain.
Background
There is a clear relationship between obesity and carbohydrate metabolism
alterations (CMA), such as impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and T2D. OGTT is
used for the diagnosis of those alterations, but is not performed in case of normal
fasting glucose values (NFG). Moreover, BMI underestimates the diagnosis of
obesity and body composition alteration can be crucial to the development of
abnormal  carbohydrate  metabolism.  This  study  aimed  to  examine  the
discriminating  value  of  body  composition  study  and  anthropometric  data
compared with BMI in the diagnosis of CMA.
Objectives
Describe the prevalence of CMA in patients with NFG. Study the discriminating
value of body composition [total body fat % (BF%) and visceral adipose tissue
(VAT)] and anthropometric data to detect CMA in men with NFG.
Methods
We recruited 170 non-diabetic men O18-year-old with NFG (%99 mg/dl)
who  underwent  a  75  g  OGTT  with  a  concomitant  body  composition  and
anthropometry study between 2000 and 2014. Body density was estimated by Air-
Displacement Plethysmography (Bod-Podw). BF% was estimated from body
density using the Siri equation. Bioelectrical impedance analysis was used to
determine visceral fat by the ViScan system (Tanita Corpw). Patients were
classified by glucose tolerance on the basis of blood glucose levels according to
WHO diagnostic criteria for diabetes (2006). The statistical software package
SPSS 20.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC)
was used for diagnostic test evaluation.
Results
Basal characteristics: BMI 36.05G8.12, 30.54G14.7 years, Physical activity
level 1.56G0.12, HOMA-IR 2.94G1.87. The prevalence of IGT and T2D was
21.6% and 2.7% respectively. AUC of waist-to-hip ratio was 0.68, BF% 0.61,
waist circumference 0.60, BMI 0.58 and VAT 0.54. All variables demonstrated a
significant discriminating value (p-valueZ0.023).
Conclusions
In our population, CMA prevalence was 24.3% after OGTT, so normal fasting
glycaemia does not rule out CMA. Among all the anthropometric and body
composition parameters analysed, waist-to-hip ratio was the most discriminative
detecting CMA in our population, and it could be helpful in order to select
patients in which an OGTT should be performed. This can help to establish
appropriate measures to reduce cardiometabolic risk in men.
Keywords: Obesity, Anthropometry, Body composition, Body fat, Visceral fat,
Oral glucose tolerance testing
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP792
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP793
Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome - longitudinal outcomes and
improvement predictors after bariatric surgery
Rita Bettencourt-Silva1,2, Daniela Magalhães1,2, Pedro Souteiro1,2,
João Sérgio Neves1,2, Sofia Castro Oliveira1,2, Maria Manuel Costa1,2,
Ana Saavedra1,2, Marília Bettencourt-Silva3, Leonor Almeida4,
Marta Drummond2,4, Joana Queirós1,5, Ana Varela1,2, Paula Freitas1,2,
Flora Correia2,6, Davide Carvalho1,2 & AMTCO group1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro Hospi-
talar São João, EPE, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Institute of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, New
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal;4Department of Pneumonology,
Centro Hospitalar Sa˜o João, EPE, Porto, Portugal;5Multidisciplinary Group
for Surgical Management of Obesity, Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto,
Portugal;6Faculty of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal.
Background
Bariatric surgery has been associated with a decrease in multiple obesity-related
comorbidities including obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSA). This study
aims to access the OSA evolution in obese patients who underwent bariatric
surgery.
Methods
Retrospective longitudinal study of a population of obese patients who underwent
bariatric surgery between January/2010 and July/2014 in our centre. Only patients
who have undergone polysomnography both before and after surgery were
included. We have evaluated anthropometric, metabolic and polysomnographic
data.
Results
A total of 78 patients were included, 56 (71.8%) were female, with a median age
of 51 years (interquartile range[IQR] 46.25-51.00), body mass index (BMI) of
44.04 kg/m2  (IQR 40.56-49.17) and apnoea-hypopnoea index (AHI) of 36.90
events/hour (IQR 23.40-52.15). In the preoperative evaluation, 7.7% had mild,
33.3% moderate and 59% severe OSA. The majority of them (74.4%) were
treated with continuous positive airway pressure and 20.5% were on bi-level
non-invasive ventilation. After surgery (median revaluation time was 11 months)
there were statistically significant reductions in AHI (36.9 vs. 11.4; P!0.001),
Epworth Sleepiness Scale (8 vs. 5; P!0.001), sleep time with oxygen saturation
below 90% (24.9 vs. 3.2; P!0.001) and desaturation index (31.40 vs. 8.55;
P!0.001) and significant elevations in mean (91 vs. 93.55; P!0.001) and
minimum (71.50 vs. 83; P!0.001) oxygen saturation. There was an improvement
in OSA severity in 37 (47.4%) patients and OSA resolution in 13 (16.7%)
patients. Only 43.6% continued to be treated with positive airway pressure.
The AHI improvement was positively correlated with BMI reduction (rZ0.296;
PZ0.009), total weight loss (rZ0.289; PZ0.010) and weight loss percentage
(rZ0.249; PZ0.028) and negatively correlated with preoperative values of AHI
(rZK0.792; P!0.001), BMI (rZK0.259; PZ0.022) and weight (rZK0.267;
PZ0.018). After adjusting for age and sex, BMI reduction (bZ1.217; PZ0.014),
weight loss (bZ0.418; PZ0.035), initial AHI (bZK0.840, P!0.001) and initial
BMI (bZK1.093; PZ0.017) were predictive of the AHI improvement.
Conclusion
Bariatric surgery has beneficial effect on OSA outcome. This effect seems to be
dependent on weight loss and on the preoperative values of AHI and BMI.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP793
EP794
Whole body and regional fat and lean mass in Bulgarian women of
different ages and body mass index
Mihail Boyanov
University Hospital Alexandrovska, Medical University Sofia, Sofia,
Bulgaria.
Up-to-date dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) offers an insight into body
composition (fat and lean mass) in different body regions.
Objectives
To measure the regional fat and lean mass in women of different age and to
describe age-related changes.
Material and Methods
One hundred and twenty women referred for DXA participated in the whole body
(WB) study - age range was 20-75 yrs. They were subdivided in three age groups:
20-44 (20 premenopausal women), 45-59 (80 postmenopausal women), and
60-75 (20 women). WB DXA was performed on a Hologic QDR 4500 A bone
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
densitometer (Hologic Inc., Bedford MA) and software version 8.26:3. Total body
and regional BMC, fat and lean mass were measured. Regional analysis included
arms and legs (as the sum of both left and right), as well as trunk. Descriptive and
regression analyses with age as independent variable were performed on an IBM
SPSS Statistics 19.0 for Windows platform. The data were first analyzed as a
whole and then separately for the different age groups.
Results
Comparing the 45-59 versus the 20-44 aged subgroups fat and lean mass showed
a parallel decrease, while in the older subgroup (60-75 yrs) the decrease of fat was
greater than that of lean mass. The percentage of fat mass was lowest in the oldest
subgroup. Comparing the 45-59 versus the 20-44 aged subgroups fat and lean
mass showed a parallel decrease in the legs, but fat showed a greater decrease than
lean in the arms and trunk. Best fitting regression models with age as independent
and WB lean and fat mass as dependent variables are shown.
Conclusion
Aging has a more pronounced effect on fat than lean mass. The reduction of both
body compartments is different according to the region studied. This type of data
could be useful in the study of sarcopenia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP794
EP795
Effect of osteocalcin on fat distrubution in premenopausal obese women
Ozen Dedeoglu1, Guzin Yaylali2, Tolga Yaylali3, Senay Topsakal2,
Fulya Akin2, Duygu Herek4 & Hande Senol5
1Pamukkale University, Department of Internal Medicine, Denizli, Turkey;
2Pamukkale University, Department of Endocrinology, Denizli, Turkey;
3Pamukkale University, Department of Cardiology, Denizli, Turkey;
4Pamukkale University, Department of Radiology, Denizli, Turkey;
5Pamukkale University, Department of Biostatistics, Denizli, Turkey.
Introduction
Recent studies suggested that plasma levels of osteocalcin (OC) were negatively
associated with both fat mass and plasma glucose. These findings may suggest
that endocrine function of the osteoblast-derived osteocalcin on fat mass/glucose
homeostasis in mice also might exist in humans. The aim of this study was to
determine if osteocalcin has any effect on fat distrubution in different parts of
body.
Methods
Eighty-six obese premenapousal women (aged 17-55 years) and 56 women with
normal BMI took part in this study. Antropometric measurements including waist
circumferences (WC) were done. Serum concentrations of fasting blood glucose,
insulin,  OC  were  measuresd.  Body  fat  distrubution  was  evaluated  by
ultarsonography. Body fat thickness in four regions were measured. Total fat
and fat ratio were also measured by Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis (BIA).
Epicardial fat thickness (EFT) was measured by echocardiography.
Obese
Control
P
Visseral fat thickness (mm)
54.17
30.04
0.000
Preperitoneal fat thickness (mm)
20.36
6.72
0.000
Subcutaneous fat thickness (mm)
34.38
18.59
0.000
Epicardial fat thickness (mm)
5.19
3.25
0.000
Osteocalcin (ml/min)
18.26
22.53
0.000
Results
Visceral (VFT), subcutaneous (SFT) and preperitoneal fat thickness (PFT) were
significantly higher in obese subjects (P ! 0.01). OC was significantly lower
in obese subjects. There wasn’t any correlation between OC and VFT, SFT,PFT
or EFT. Leg fat mass measured by BIA was negatively correlated with OC
(PZ0.005, rZK0.328).
Conclusion
Premenopausal obese women have lower OC levels but this doesn’ t seem to be
correlated with body fat distrubution in any part of body.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP795
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP796
Decrease in arterial stiffness (AS) in morbidly obese (MO) patients after
bariatric surgery (BS): Relationship with obstructive sleep apnoea
(OSA), anthropometric parameters and low-grade inflammation (LGI)
Assumpta Caixàs1, Raquel Tirado1, Laura Vigil2, María José Masdeu2,
María Villaplana2, Alexis Luna3, Pere Rebassa3, Marta Hurtado1,
Rocío Pareja1, Belen Pons1 & Mercedes Rigla1
1Endocrinology and Nutrition Departament, Hospital de Sabadell, Corpor-
ació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí- UAB Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus d’Excel lència Internaci, Sabadell, Spain;
2Pneumology Department Hospital de Sabadell, Corporació Sanitària Parc
Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí- UAB Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Campus d’Excel lència Internacional 08193 Bellater, Sabadell,
Spain;3Surgery Department, Hospital de Sabadell, Corporació Sanitària
Parc Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí- UAB Universitat Autònoma
de Barcelona, Campus d’Excel lència Internacional 08193 Bellaterra,
Bellatera-Sabadell, Spain.
Materials and methods
We studied 30 MO patients with OSA without Continuous Positive Airway
Pressure
(CPAP) treatment, before and one year after surgery. All patients
underwent overnight conventional polisomnography (CE-Series Compumedics,
Victoria,  Australia).  Sleeve  gastrectomy or Roux-en-Y gastric  bypass  were
performed according to the local protocol. To asses AS, augmentation index
adjusted  for  heart  rate
(IAx@75)  was  obtained  by  applanation  tonometry
(Sphygmocorw  versión 7.0 AtCor Medical, Sidney, Australia). To assess LGI,
TNFa,  IL-6,  IL1b,  PCR  and  adiponectin  levels  were  measured
(Milliplex
Catalog, Merck Millipore, Madrid). Average blood pressure (ABP), BMI and %
body fat (%BF) by bioelectrical impedance (TANITA) were also measured. For
statistical analysis SPSS version 19 was used.
Results
AS, ABP and LGI decreased after BS (IA@75 22.6G11.5 vs 19.0G12.8, ABP
102.3G9.02 vs 95.1G8.97 mmHg, TNFa 3.07G1.89 vs 2.47G1.3 pg/mL, IL6
0.64G0.87 vs 0.45G0.76 pg/mL) and adiponectin increased (15.3G8.83 vs
30.4G14.7 mg/mL), P!0.05 before vs after surgery. IA@75 decline correlated
with BMI and %BF improvement (rZ0.532, PZ0.002; rZ0.491, PZ0.006,
respectively) but not with LGI improvement. IA@75 decline was predicted
by Apnoea Hypopnoea index (betaZK0.489, PZ0.009) and %BF (betaZ0.426,
PZ0.021), before surgery.
Conclusion
In patients with MO and OSA, the less OSA severity and the more %BF before
surgery, the more AS improvement achieved after BS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP796
EP797
Relationship between the severity of obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA),
low-grade-inflammation (LGI) and Heme Oxygenase 1 (HO1) in
morbidly obese (MO) patients, before and after bariatric surgery (BS)
Raquel Tirado1, María José Masdeu2, Laura Vigil2, Pere Rebassa3,
Alexis Luna3, Sandra Montmany3, María Villaplana1, Belen Pons1,
Mercedes Rigla1 & Assumpta Caixàs1
1Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital de Sabadell, Corpor-
ació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí- UAB Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus d’Excel lència Internacio, Sabadell,
Spain;2Pneumology Department, Hospital de Sabadell, Corporació
Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí- UAB Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus d’Excel lència Internacional 08193
Bellate, Sabadell, Spain;3Surgery Department, Hospital de Sabadell,
Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Taulí- UAB
Universitat Autònoma de Barelona, Campus d’Excel lència Internacional
08193 Bellaterra, Sabadell, Spain.
Introduction
HO1 is a new adipokine with a protective role against cellular stress and hypoxia1.
MO presents with high low grade inflammation (LGI)2 and high circulating levels
or adipose tissue expression of HO13. The effect of bariatric surgery on HO1 and
its relationship with OSA and LGI has not yet been studied.
Methods
We studied 66 MO patients before and 1 year after BS. All of them presented
OSA without Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) treatment (20 mild,
16  moderate  and  30  sever).  OSA  diagnosis  was  given  after  an  overnight
conventional polisomnography (CE-Series Compumedics, Victoria, Australia).
Sleeve gastrectomy or Roux-en-Y gastric bypass were performed according to the
local protocol. HO1 (Elisa Kit bioNova científica, s.l.Madrid) and LGI (TNFa,
IL6, IL1b, PCR and adiponectin) were measured (Milliplex Catalog, Merck
Millipore, Madrid), before and after bariatric surgery. BMI, waist circumference,
% body fat by bioelectrical impedance (TANITA) and HOMA insulin resistance
index were also assessed. For statistical analysis SPSS-PC-plus version 19 was
used.
Results
Plasma HO1 did not differ between OSA groups. After surgery, HO1 levels
decreased significantly (7.11G2.99 vs 6.59G2.47 ng/mL, P!0.01, before vs
after), however, this effect was only observed in those patients who had sever
OSA (7.64G3.78 vs 6.88G2.88 ng/mL, PZ0.02, before vs after). The decrease
in HO1 levels correlated with HOMA improvement (rZ0.257, PZ0.028) but not
with the improvement of the other adipokines.
Conclusion
Improvement of plasma HO1 in MO patients after bariatric surgery is related to
the severity of OSA and the degree of insulin resistance but not to LGI.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP797
EP798
Serotoninergic influence of the developing of obesity in children
Olga Zagrebaeva1, Anzhalika Solntsava1, Tatsiana Yemelyantsava2,
Helena Dashkievich3 & Elena Aksyonova4
1Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus;2Republican
Research and Practice Center for Mental Health, Minsk, Belarus;310th
Clinical Hospital, Minsk, Belarus;4Institute of Genetics and Cytology,
Minsk, Belarus.
Background
It is well known that many nuerohormonal and genetic factors influence on the
developing of obesity in children. Serotoninergic system is determined to be one
of the most important factors. Serotonin may induce lipogenesis or triacylglycerol
synthesis in the liver and/or white adipose tissue.
Aim
To  establish  interactions  between  serotoninergic  system  and  metabolic
parameters in obese children.
Methods
We examined 280 children (boys/girlsZ157/123) with different forms of obesity
(age - 14.2G2.1 yrs, BMI - 32.5G5.4 kg/m2) and 80 normal weight control
(boys/girlsZ35/45) (age - 14.3G2.1 yrs (PZ0.7), BMI - 19.7G2,1 kg/m2
(PZ0.0001)). Blood samples were collected with the determining of serotonin,
triglycerides (TG), fasting glucose, total cholesterole (TCh), low- (LDLP) and
high density lipoproteid (HDLP) levels. Genetic assay with the determining of
metilsallitilite  levels  of  monoaminioxydase  A  gene
(MAOA)  and  gene  of
serotonin transporter (SLC6A4) were made. The results were processed using
SPSS 18.0.
Results
Obese children showed a significant increase of serotonin levels: obesity 259.2
[58.5, 378.3]; control - 131.7 [10, 276.1] (PZ0.002, UZ3426.5). There was
a reliable correlation between serotonine and TG (PZ0.025, rsZ0.2), LDLP
(PZ0.036, rsZ0.25) in obese children. We didn’t find any reliable correlation
between serotonine and glucose, TCh, HDLP.
During the genetical assay we found that obese girls have MAOA 3/3 genotype 3
times more often compared to control girls, MAOA 4/4 genotype was found in
37,5% control and 19,4% obese girls. We didn’t find any significant differences
between SLC6A4 gene between obese and control groups.
Conclusions
Serotonine levels are increased in obese children compared to control and have
reliable correlations with TG, LDLP which can say about its influence on adipose
tissue. MAOA 3/3 genotype seems to be interacted with obesity, additional
investigations should be made.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP798
EP799
16p11.2 Microdeletion and Prader Willi syndrome: similarities and
differences
Laia Casamitjana1, Assumpta Caixàs1, Irene-Noelia Berges1, Lara Albert1,
Albert Cano1, Ismael Capel1, Olga Giménez-Palop1, Elisabet Gabau2,
Raquel Corripio3 & Mercedes Rigla1
1Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital de Sabadell, Corpor-
ació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut de Recerca I3PT(UAB), Sabadell
(Barcelona), Spain;2Pediatric Clinical Genetics Department, Hospital de
Sabadell, Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut de Recerca I3PT(UAB),
Sabadell (Barcelona), Spain;3Pediatrics Department.Hospital de Sabadell,
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Institut de Recerca I3PT(UAB), Sabadell
(Barcelona), Spain.
Introduction
Prader Willi syndrome (PWS) is the most common syndromic form of obesity,
caused by the absence of expression of the paternally active gens on the long arm
of chromosome 15.The 16p11.2 microdeletion has recently been recognized as a
syndromic condition appearing to be a predisposing factor for overweight, being
the second most common genetic cause of obesity. One possible causative gen-
SH2B1- involving leptin and insulin signaling, has been identified, although other
genes may play a role.
Case report
We describe a case series of seven patients diagnosed with 16p11.2 deletion in our
hospital between 2013-2015 and compare their main features with PWS. Four of
them were men with an average age at diagnosis of 9.9G6.1 years. Two of them
were referred to our clinical genetics department with a suspected diagnosis of
PWS. Five of them had a sex-specific BMI for age over 95th percent. The mean
length of deletion was 530.7Kb [448-598].Two of them suffered seizures and one
patient had sleep apnoea.In the same way as PWS individuals, patients with
16p11.2 deletion present with hypotonia at birth. They may exhibit develop-
mental delay, intellectual disability, and/or autism spectrum disorder. Weight is
variable in childhood, but hyperphagia and obesity usually starts from one year on
in PWS and later in 16p11.2 deletion. On the other hand, individuals with 16p11.2
syndrome don’t have short stature nor other hormonal deficiencies as PWS
individuals do (thyroid or reproductive axis). They can suffer from minor cardiac
malformations but not from scoliosis.
Conclusions
Since the implementation of array analysis, numerous microdeletion syndromes
as 16p11.2 have been described. Further research is needed for a comprehensive
characterization of a genotype-phenotype correlation. It should be considered as
one of the genetic causes of obesity following PWS. It’s important to identify
clinical characteristics, leading to perform genetic testing and counseling.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP799
EP800
Phenylbutyrate inhibits diet induced obesity through inhibition of
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
Dongwook kim1, Byung-keol Min2, Hyeon-Ji kang2, Byoungjun Choi3 &
In-Kyu Lee1,3
1Leading-edge Research Center for Drug Discovery and Development for
Diabetes and Metabolic Disease, Kyungpook National University, Daegu,
Republic of Korea;2Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea;3Department of
Internal Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of
Korea.
Obesity caused by excess energy intake has been emerging as a major health
concern in the world, with increased risk leading to diabetes, hypertension,
nephropathy, and cardiovascular disease. A better understanding of the molecular
mechanism  on  how  obesity  develops  is  of  critically  clinical  importance.
Accumulating data suggest that ER-stress is strongly related with development
of obesity, implying that ER stress can be a therapeutically target of obesity.
4-Phenylbutyrate (PBA) which is known as a chemical chaperon has known to
decrease ER-stress. However, the detailed molecular mechanism by which PBA
decreases ER-stress remains elusive. To identify the effect of PBA on body
weight gain, high fat diet (HFD) feeding mice were treated with PBA for 8weeks.
As expected, HFD feeding dramatically induced body weight, but PBA treatment
showed a resistance to HFD-induced weight gain. CT (computed tomography)
scan image showed that abdominal and subcutaneous fat accumulation were
dramatically decreased by PBA. Furthermore, fat composition analysis identified
that whole body fat mass was decreased and lean body mass was increased by
PBA  as  compared  with  control  group.  H&E  staining  showed  that  lipid
accumulation in liver and fat tissues was decreased by PBA. To do further
analysis the effect of PBA, we took advantage of genetic mouse model of obesity
(ob/ob). Although we could not find significant difference in body weight by PBA,
but blood glucose level was clearly decreased. Meanwhile, PBA improved
glucose tolerance and insulin tolerance. Western analysis with Liver tissue
samples from ob/ob mice showed that PBA decreased protein expression level of
GRP78, ATF4 and CHOP as well as inhibited activities of protein pyruvate
dehydrogenase  kinase
(PDK)  which  is  an  upstream  kinase  of  pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex (PDC) that is gatekeeper in pyruvate metabolism in
mitochondria. These results suggest that PBA decrease diet induced obesity by
alleviating ER-stress by modulating PDK activities.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP800
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP801
Comparison of the effects on comorbidities and the safety of gastric
bypass and sleeve gastrectomy in morbid obesity patients
Francisco Javier Vílchez-López1, Isabel Mateo-Gavira1, María
Belén Ojeda-Schuldt1, María Ángeles Mayo-Osorio2, José Manuel
Pacheco-García2, Luis Escobar-Jiménez1 & Manuel Aguilar-Diosdado1
1Endocrinology Department, Puerta del Mar Hospital, Cádiz, Andalucía,
Spain;2Surgery Department, Puerta del Mar Hospital, Cádiz, Andalucía,
Spain.
Introduction
Obesity is a multifactorial disease associated with numerous comorbidities.
Bariatric surgery is postulated as an effective tool in weight loss and improves
associated pathologies. The aim of this study was to evaluate and compare the
safety and the effects on major comorbidities associated with morbid obesity of
gastric bypass (GBP) and sleeve gastrectomy (SG) 2 years after intervention.
Methods
Cohort study with intrasubject measures (before-after) in a sample of patients
with morbid obesity who underwent bariatric surgery (GBP or SG). Demographic
characteristics, anthropometric parameters and cardiovascular risk factors were
analyzed, at baseline and 2 years after surgery. Surgical complications were
classified into early (first month after intervention) and late (more than 1 month).
Results
211 patients were included. The mean age was 37.9G9.8 years and 157 were
female (74%). The mean baseline BMI was 51.13G7.11 kg/m2. Regarding the
surgical techniques, 178 (84.35%) underwent BPG and 35 (16.4%) SG, without
significant preoperative differences between groups. 2 years after surgery, the
percentage of excess weight loss was 73.06G14.06% in the BPG group vs
66.61G18.46% in SG (PZ0.02). The resolution of hypertension, dyslipidemia
and diabetes occurred in 75%, 93.96% and 86.95% respectively in the BPG group
and 63.63%, 77.7% and 85.71% in the group who underwent sleeve gastrectomy.
Regarding surgical complications, 15.5% had late complications in BPG group vs
3.1% in sleeve group, while the rate of early complications was 26.8% vs. 6.2%
respectively (P!0.001).
Conclusion
In our area, BPG is more effective in weight loss and resolution of dyslipidemia at
2 years, while both techniques are equally effective in resolution of diabetes and
hypertension. The rate of surgical complications is lower in patients undergoing
sleeve gastrectomy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP801
EP802
A 4-year effects of body weight reduction on arterial function after
bariatric surgery in morbidly obese patients
Vilma Dzenkeviciute1, Zaneta Petrulioniene1, Virginijus Sapoka2,
Vaidotas Urbanavicius2, Gintautas Brimas3 & Aiste Galkine2
1Vilnius University Medical Faculty, Clinic of Heart and Vascular
Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania;2Vilnius University Medical Faculty, Clinic of
Internal Medicine, Oncology and Family Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania;
3Vilnius University Medical Faculty, Clinic of Gastroenterology,
Nephrourology and Surgery, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Objective
To determine the long-term effect of weight loss on arterial function parameters in
morbidly obese patients who underwent laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding
(LAGB).
Subjects
Forty-eight Caucasian subjects mean age 47.38G10.77 years and 32 (66.67%)
were female with morbid obesity who underwent LAGB and completed 4 years
follow-up.
Measurements
Patients were evaluated at baseline, 1 year and 4 years after LAGB for excess
weightloss (EWL), arterial blood pressure (BP), metabolic factors including
leptin, adiponectin, glucose, HbA1C, insulin, Homeostasis model assessment-
insulin resistance (HOMA-IR). Endothelial function was evaluated as reactive
hyperemic index (RHI) and assessed using the EndoPAT 2000 device and arterial
stiffness was determined by cardio - ankle vascular index (CAVI) using a VaSera
VS-1000 vascular screening system (Fukuda Denshi, Tokyo, Japan).
Results
Subjects achieved a 29.90G14.76% EWL at one year and 36.57G23.91% EWL
at four years after.
Subjects demonstrated significant improvement in metabolic parameters: an
increase in adiponectin level (from 10.42G7.15 to 15.54G9.30 P!0.001) and a
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
reduction in leptin
(from 34.54G16.45 to 30.71G17.45 P!0.001), glucose
(from 6.23G2.36 to 5.17G0.54 PZ0.002), insulin levels (from 171.07G206.32
to 64.68G40.92 PZ0.001.), HbA1c (from 6.15G1.01 to 5.70G0.55 P!0.001).
Although, changes in average diastolic blood pressure did not reach significant
differences after one and four years post-surgery, however systolic blood pressure
was significantly lower four years after.
However, there were statistically significant increase in arterial stiffness after
1 years, but not significant differences were noted after 4 year (6.58G1.77 to
7.03G2.00 m/s; PZ0.014 vs to 7.12G2.19 m/s; PZ0.153). While, endothelial
function did not show any improvement (2.07G0.51 to 2.01G0.54% PZ0.948
vs to 2.05G0.42% PZ0.086).
Conclusion
Weight reduction induced by LAGB was associated with significant improvement
of metabolic parameters, as well as arterial stiffness but not with the endothelial
function.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP802
EP803
Msr1 and Cxcl16 scavenger receptors in adipose tissue are positively
associated with BMI and insulin resistance
Concepción Santiago-Fernández1, JM García-Almeida1,2,
Carolina Gutierrez-Repiso3, Juan Alcaide1, Luis Ocan˜a-Wilhelmi4,
Monica Tomé1, Alejandro Rodríguez-Morata5, Francisco J Tinahones1,2,
Franz Tatzber6, Edith Pursch7, Eduardo García-Fuentes2,3 &
Lourdes Garrido-Sánchez1,2
1Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Biomedical Research Institute
of Malaga (IBIMA), Virgen de la Victoria Hospital, Málaga, Spain;2CIBER
Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBERObn), Instituto Salud
Carlos III, Málaga, Spain;3Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition,
Biomedical Research Institute of Malaga (IBIMA), Regional University
Hospital, Malaga, Málaga, Spain;4Department of Surgery, Biomedical
Research Institute of Malaga (IBIMA), Virgen de la Victoria Hospital,
Málaga, Spain;5Department of Angiology and Vascular Surgery,
Biomedical Research Institute of Malaga (IBIMA), Virgen de la Victoria
Hospital, Málaga, Spain;6Medical University of Graz, Centre of Molecular
Medicine, Institute of Pathophysiology & Immunology, Gratz, Austria;
7University of Applied Sciences Technikum Wien, Institute of
Biochemistry, Vienna, Austria.
Introduction
Obesity is associated with an increasing risk of diabetes and atherosclerosis.
Previous studies in animals show that oxidized low-density lipoprotein (Ox-LDL)
can be captured by the adipocyte through different scavenger receptors (SR) and
thus contribute to the worsening of insulin resistance (IR). We analyze the
association between Ox-LDL levels and different SR present in adipose tissue and
their relationship with the presence of obesity and insulin resistance (IR).
Design
We study serum levels of Ox-LDL-oxidized and different SR, as well as the levels
of  mRNA  gene  expression  of  different  SR  (lectin-like  oxLDL-1  (LOX-1),
macrophage scavenger receptor 1 (MSR1) and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand
16
(CXCL16)) in visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) from 23
normal weight and 25 morbidly obese patients (MO) depending on their IR (low
and high IR).
Results
Serum Ox-LDL and LOX-1 levels are higher in MO patients with high IR
(P!0.05). Serum MSR1 levels are higher in the MO patients (P!0.05). MSR-1
mRNA expression level is higher in MO patients with high IR in VAT and SAT
(P!0.05). CXCL16 mRNA expression level is higher in MO patients in VAT and
SAT (P!0.05). LOX-1 in VAT is positively associated with body mass index
(BMI), waist and hips circumferences and cholesterol, and negatively with the
HDL-c and adiponectin. MSR1 and CXCL16 in VAT and SAT are positively
associated with BMI, waist and hips circumferences, insulin, glucose, HOMA-IR
and triglycerides, and negatively associated with adiponectin and HDL-c.
Conclusions
In  this  study  we  demonstrate  the  positive  association  between  MSR1
and
CXCL16 mRNA gene expression levels and BMI and IR.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP803
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP804
Medium-term evolution of ghrelin levels according to three types of
bariatric surgeries and its relation with HDL and insulin resistance
Concepción Santiago-Fernández1, Sara García-Serrano2,3, Monica Tomé1,
Sergio Valdés2,3, Luis Oca
˜ a-Wilhelmi4, Alberto Rodríguez-Can˜ ete5,
Francisco J. Tinahones1,6, Eduardo García-Fuentes2,6 & Lourdes
Garrido-Sánchez1,6
1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Instituto de
Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Clínico Virgen de la
Victoria, Málaga, Spain;2Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Endocrinología y
Nutrición, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA),
Hospital Regional Universitario, Málaga, Spain;3CIBER de Diabetes y
Enfermedades Metabólicas (CIBERDEM), Málaga, Spain;4Unidad de
Gestión Clínica de Cirugía General, Digestiva y Trasplantes, Instituto de
Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Clínico Virgen de la
Victoria, Málaga, Spain;5Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Cirugía General,
Digestiva y Trasplantes, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga
(IBIMA), Hospital Regional Universitario, Málaga, Spain;6CIBER
Fisiología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Málaga, Spain.
Introduction
Ghrelin is a gastrointestinal peptide involved in the regulation of body weight and
energy balance. However, its behavior after bariatric surgery and its relationship
with other biochemical variables is still under discussion. We aim to undertake
a simultaneous evaluation of the changes in ghrelin levels after three types of
bariatric surgery and its relationship with different variables.
Design
The study included 21 non-obese and 103 morbidly obese subjects before and
6 months after bariatric surgery (Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) (nZ30),
biliopancreatic diversion of Scopinaro (BPD) (nZ47) and sleeve gastrectomy
(SG) (nZ26).
Results
Ghrelin was decreased in morbidly obese subjects (P!0.05). A multiple linear
regression model showed that ghrelin was positively associated with HDL-
cholesterol  before  bariatric  surgery
(PZ0.037). RYGB  increased ghrelin
(P!0.05), BPD did not modify significantly ghrelin and SG decreased ghrelin
(P!0.05). The percentage of change in ghrelin levels (D-ghrelin) was associated
with the type of surgery in a multiple linear regression model (PZ0.017). When
we performed the same analysis only with those morbidly obese subjects in which
gastric fundus is not excluded (RYGB and BPD), D-ghrelin was negatively
associated with D-HOMA-IR in a multiple linear regression model (PZ0.001).
Conclusion
In conclusion, HDL-cholesterol could be involved in the regulation of baseline
ghrelin levels in morbidly obese subjects. Changes in ghrelin levels after bariatric
surgery would be associated to the presence/absence of gastric fundus. Insulin
resistance would be associated to the evolution of ghrelin levels after bariatric
surgery in those techniques in which fundus is not excluded (RYGP and BPD).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP804
EP805
Aripiprazole effects on triglyceride content of in vitro differentiating
adipocytes
Melinda Kolcsár1, Zsolt Gáll1, Tamás Tábi2, László István Bába3,
Szabolcs Koncz4 & Imre Zoltán Kun5
1Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy, University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Tîrgu Mures, Romania;2Department of
Pharmacodynamics, Budapest, Hungary;3Resident in Clinical Pharmacy,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tîrgu Mures, Romania;4Student of
the Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tîrgu
Mures, Romania;5Doctoral School, University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Tîrgu Mures, Romania.
Introduction
In vitro  adipogenesis  is  a  two-step developmental  process  in  which  an
undifferentiated  mesenchymal  cell  differentiates  into  a  preadipocyte,  which
then undergoes a secondary differentiation step to become a lipid-filled adipocyte.
The  triglyceride  accumulation  is  influenced  by  various  endogenous  and
exogenous factors.
Methods
In an attempt to understand the antipsychotics effects on lipid accumulation
during adipogenesis, aripiprazole and olanzapine effects on triglyceride content
were  studied.To  induce  adipocyte  differentiation  from  mouse  embryonic
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
fibroblasts
(MEF),  these  were  grown  to  confluence  and  then  cultured  in
adipogenic medium (DMEM C5 mM DEX C0.2 mM IBMX C10 mg/ml insulin)
for 2 days and in a sustaining medium (DMEM C10 mg/ml insulin) for 12 days.
Cells exposed to adipogenic mediumGpioglitazone were used as absolute and
positive controls, respectively. Aripiprazole and olanzapine were used at different
concentrations (0.5, 5 and 20 mM). On the 7th and 14th days after induction, the
cells viability test and Oil red O staining were performed. The accumulated Oil
red O was dissolved in 1 ml 100% isopropanol and spectrophotometric analysis
was performed (results expressed in mAU). For statistical analysis Student’s t test
was used and the significance level was established at P!0.05.
Results
Aripiprazole and olanzapine had no cytotoxic effect at the concentrations tested.
After 7 days no significant differences were observed in the triglyceride contents
of the cells, but highest mAU was obtained in pioglitazone (238G23.2) and 5 mM
aripiprazole
(272G65.7)  added  cultures.  Although  a  decrease  of  lipid
accumulation in all of the cells was observed in the 14th day, in pioglitazone
and 5 mM aripiprazole added cultures signficantly higher triglyceride contents
were present than in the control cells.
Conclusion
Our  results  demonstrate  that  aripiprazole  similarly  to  pioglitazone  but  not
olanzapine increased the triglyceride content during in vitro adipogenesis in MEF
cells.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the Domus Program of the Hungarian Academy of
Sciences (Grant no. 5706/7/2015).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP805
EP806
Copeptin, a marker of vasopressin, decreases significantly in early state
after bariatric surgery
Recep Aktimur1, Turkan Mete2, Suleyman Cetinkunar3, Mehmet Yaman4,
Osman Beton5, Emre Avci6, Hasan Erdem3 & Kadir Yildirim1
1Department of General Surgery, Ministry of Health, Samsun Training and
Research Hospital, Samsun, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Ministry of Health, Samsun Training and Research Hospital,
Samsun, Turkey;3Department of General Surgery, Adana Numune Training
and Research Hospital, Adana, Turkey;4Department of Cardiology,
Ministry of Health, Samsun Training and Research Hospital, Samsun,
Turkey;5Department of Cardiology, Cumhuriyet University Faculty of
Medicine, Sivas, Turkey;6Department of Biology/Biochemistry, Faculty of
Science and Arts, Hitit University, C¸ orum, Turkey.
Introduction
Copeptin, the C-terminal fragment of arginine vasopressin pro-hormone, has been
associated  with  the  metabolic  syndrome
(MetS),  diabetes  mellitus
(DM)
development. The aim of our study is to evaluate preoperative and postoperative
alterations of copeptin in patients who underwent obesity surgery and evaluate
any differences between sleeve gastrectomy (SG) and mini gastric bypass (MGB)
in terms of copeptin levels.
Subjects and Methods
Twenty five consecutive patients, who were treated for morbid obesity by SG or
MGB, between March and April 2015 were included in this study. Diagnosis of
MetS was made according to NCEP ATP-III criteria. Blood samples were
obtained from patients preoperatively and one month after operation. ELISA
technique was used to measure copeptin level in plasma samples.
Resullts
SG and MGB were applied to 11 and 14 patients, respectively. Mean ages (35G
8.3 vs. 34.7G7.7, PZ0.908) and body mass indexes of the two groups were
similar (44.3G2.3 vs 44.2G3.2, PZ0.948). Mean preoperative copeptin levels of
patients who had SG (0.715G0.619 ng/ml) and MGB (0.577G0.222 ng/ml) were
similar (PZ0.003). At postoperative 1st month mean weight loss of the patients
was
12.4 kg.  Postoperative  copeptin  levels  were  statistically  significantly
decreased  in  both groups  compared  with  preoperative  levels
(SG; 0.628G
0.610 ng/ml, PZ0.03, MGB; 0.474G0.180 ng/ml, PZ0.01).
Conclusions
Recent studies have demonstrated the association between copeptin level and DM
and MetS. Our study is the first one to show that copeptin significantly decrease
during early postoperative period after obesity surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP806
EP807
Changes in SCD1 promoter DNA methylation after bariatric surgery in
morbid obese patients are associated with free fatty acids levels
Sonsoles Morcillo1,2, Gracia Ma Martin-Nun˜ ez1, Sara Garcia-Serrano3,4,
Carolina Gutierrez-Repiso3, Francisca Rodriguez-Pacheco3,4,
Ailec Ho-Plagaro3, Miguel A Alaminos-Castillo3, Sergio Valdes3,4,
Motserrat Gonzalo3, Francisco J. Moreno-Ruiz5, Custodia Montiel-Casado5,
Alberto Rodriguez-Can˜ ete5 & Eduardo Garcia-Fuentes2,3
1Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Biomedical Research Institute
of Malaga (IBIMA), Virgen de la Victoria Hospital, Malaga, Spain;2CIBER
Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBERObn), Instituto Salud
Carlos III, Malaga, Spain;3Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition,
Biomedical Research Institute of Malaga (IBIMA), Regional University
Hospital, Malaga, Spain;4CIBER of Diabetes and Associated Metabolic
Disorders (CIBERDEM), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Malaga, Spain;
5Department of Surgery, Biomedical Research Institute of Malaga (IBIMA),
Regional University Hospital, Malaga, Spain.
Introduction
Epigenetic  is  acquiring  great  importance  in  complex  diseases,  providing
mechanisms whereby environmental factors can influence complex diseases
such as obesity and type 2 diabetes. Experimental animal and human studies have
revealed the association between SCD1 and obesity and insulin resistance. The
aim of this study was to evaluate whether metabolic changes after intervention are
associated with DNA methylation pattern and if these changes are related to
weigh loss.
Methods
The study included 65 subjects with morbid obesity underwent laparoscopic
Roux-en Y gastric by-pass. These subjects were studied before and 6 months after
bariatric surgery. Serum biochemical and hormone variables were measured. The
methylation status of the CpG island region of the SCD1 gene promoter was
determinated.
Results
DNA  methylation  levels  of  the  SCD1
gene  promoter  increased  after  the
intervention (1.54 vs 2.17, P!0.001). There were no significant differences in
SCD1 DNA methylation levels between males and females, neither according to
age (data not shown).
A negative association was observed between changes in SCD1 gene promoter
methylation and changes in FFA and HOMA-IR (rZK0.442; PZ0.006, and
rZK0.249; PZ0.035, respectively). On the opposite, a positive association was
found between changes in SCD1 gene promoter methylation levels and changes in
adiponectin levels (rZ0.389, PZ0.019).
Conclusions
The main finding of our study is the association found between changes of
metabolic parameters and changes in SCD1 methylation levels after bariatric
surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP807
EP808
Increased Urocortin 3 blood levels in morbidly obese subjects are
reduced after excess body weight reduction with laparoscopic sleeve
gastrectomy
Alexandra Bargiota1, Dimitris Papamargaritis1, Eleni Sioka2,
Dimitris Zacharoulis2, George Tzovaras2 & George Koukoulis1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital
of Larissa, Larissa, Greece;2Department of Surgery, University Hospital of
Larissa, Larissa, Greece.
Aim
To measure Urocortin3 (Ucn3) blood levels in morbidly obese (MO) non diabetic
patients before and after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) for excess body
weight reduction and explore its relationship with b-cell function. Ucn3
is
involved in insulin secretion in the presence of nutrient excess, a key feature of
obesity, and may be an integral part of the compensation of b-cells function.
Methods
Nine MO patients who underwent LSG and 11 healthy non-obese subjects (HS)
were studied. MO and HS had, preoperatively and 6 months postoperatively, a
2-hour, 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Blood samples were withdrawn
at 0, 30, 60, 90 and 120 minutes for glucose, insulin, lipid levels measurements
and for Ucn3 levels at 0 and 60 minutes. HOMAR, Matsuda index, insulinogenic
index and desposition index were also calculated.
Results
In MO, six months after the operation, mean BMI and waist circumference
decreased  significantly
(from
44.7
to
30.5 Kg/m2
and
130.8
to
99.2 cm,
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
respectively). Blood Ucn3 levels in MO decreased significantly 6 months after
LSG (24.45G9.42 vs 3.66G2.71 pg/dl; PZ0.001), down to levels similar to HS.
Body weight reduction was followed by significant decline of fasting serum
glucose and insulin levels (94.9C10.3 to 82.9C4.9 PZ0.013 and 25.6C16.4 to
6.5C2.4 PZ0.001) and their areas under the curve (17.288C3.625 to 13.588C
2.965 PZ0.048 and 12.947C5.176 to 6.714C3.039 PZ0.001, respectively).
Insulin sensitivity increased significantly
(PZ0.001), but first phase insulin
release and b-cell function remained unchanged. Ucn3
concentrations were
positively  associated  with  insulin,  BMI,  HOMAR  and  triglycerides  levels.
However, in multiple regression analysis BMI was the only predictor.
Conclusion
Blood Ucn3 levels are significantly higher in obese non-diabetic subjects with
hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance. Reduction of excess body weight is
followed by a parallel decrease of insulin and Ucn3 blood levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP808
EP809
Glucose transporter 1 suppresses melanocortin 4 receptor activity
Anne Muller1, Lars Niederstadt2, Sabine Jyrch1, Wenke Jonas3,4,
Franziska Meyer5, Carsten Grotzinger2, Annette Schurmann3,4,
Gunnar Kleinau1, Annette Gruters1, Heiko Krude1 & Heike Biebermann1
1Institut fur Experimentelle Pädiatrische Endokrinologie, Charité-Univer-
sitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany;2Department of Hepatology and Gastro-
enterology and Molecular Cancer Research Center (MKFZ), Tumor
Targeting Lab, Charité-Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, Germany;3Department
of Experimental Diabetology, German Institute of Human Nutrition (DIfE),
Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Germany;4German Center of Diabetes Research,
Neuherberg, Germany;5Institut fur Experimentelle Endokrinologie,
Charité-Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
The  melanocortin
4
receptor
(MC4R)  represents  the  major  hypothalamic
G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) controlling feeding behavior and therefore
body weight regulation. MC4R is highly expressed in the paraventricular nucleus
(PVN) where hormonal and neuroendocrine signals from periphery and arcuate
nucleus (ARC) are allocated. MC4R knockout in mice or natural occurring loss-of
function variants result in hyperphagia and early-onset obesity. MC4R mutations
represent the most frequent genetic cause for human obesity. Over the last years
there is growing evidence that GPCRs tend to interact with other GPCRs or non-
GPCR proteins. Analyzing a possible MC4R protein network by screening for
new interaction partners, we found the glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) to be a
possible  MC4R  interacting  partner.  By  immunohistochemistry  we  could
demonstrate expression of GLUT1 on PVN neurons. Moreover, co-expression
of GLUT1 and MC4R on different murine neuronal cell-lines could be shown,
indicating a theoretical possibility that both proteins interact. Using two different
assay systems, we furthermore could affirm a direct GLUT1/MC4R interaction.
Functional studies revealed strong down-regulation of alpha-MSH mediated
MC4R  signaling  by  GLUT1  co-expression.  As  a  possible  mechanism,  we
identified  a reduction in cell surface  expression  of MC4R due to GLUT1
co-expression. Uptake studies revealed that the MC4R itself has an impact on
cellular glucose feed-in augmenting our hypothesis of a veritable connection
between glucose sensing and MC4R signaling. Finally, gene expression analyses
showed  strong  down-regulation  of  Glut1
after  three  days  of  high-fat  diet.
Therefore, nutritional reduction of GLUT1 might increase MC4R action in
controlling food intake.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP809
EP810
A body-wide transcriptome screen reveals high ghrelin gene (GHRL)
expression in monocytes and supports a hypothesis of monocyte
GHRL-derived hormones as critical mediators of the brain-gut axis
and monocyte-adipocyte cross-talk in health and obesity
Inge Seim, Gabrielle Crisp, Penelope Jeffery & Lisa Chopin
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
Introduction
It is now appreciated that peptide hormones encoded by the ghrelin gene, GHRL,
have roles in many biological systems and cell types. In particular, the hormone
ghrelin is a therapeutic target and clinical marker for a range of pathologies,
including diet-induced and genetic obesity. High-quality transcriptome (RNA-
seq) data sets generated by consortia, such as the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) and
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE), now offer an opportunity to study
the expression of any gene of interest in diverse cells and tissues.
Methods
We initially investigated GHRL expression in the human body by interrogating
publically-available transcriptomes from 35 somatic cells and tissues, revealing
relatively high expression in monocytes and associated tissues. In an effort to link
monocyte GHRL more  directly to functional outcomes, we next sought to
compare its expression in 19 women before bariatric surgery and 12 weeks
postoperatively.
Results
Monocyte  GHRL  expression  was  significantly  reduced  three  months  after
bariatric surgery (PZ0.0001 by Student’s t-test; nZ19). A previous study of
the same cohort demonstrated diminished obesity-induced inflammation and an
altered interferon-g (IFN-g) pathway in adipose tissue and monocytes post-
operatively. Here, we show that IFN-g modulates GHRL expression in the
monocyte-derived cell line THP-1 (PZ0.0079 by Mann-Whitney U test; nZ5).
Conclusion
While it is well-established that ghrelin plays a role in appetite regulation and
energy balance, the function of GHRL in immune cells has hitherto remained
enigmatic. Here, we present data that further supports cross-talk between the
endocrine and immune systems. We put forward the hypothesis that monocyte
GHRL-derived  hormones  are  critical  mediators  of  the  brain-gut  axis  and
monocyte-adipocyte cross-talk. Future longitudinal studies are needed to firmly
establish a role for monocyte GHRL-derived peptides in successful bariatric
surgery and obesity-associated pathologies, such as Prader-Willi syndrome and
metabolic syndrome, in general.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP810
EP811
Positive association between blood natural killer T cells and liver
enzymes ALT, AST and GGT levels
Soledad Lopez1,2, David Pozo1,2, Sara Garcia-Serrano3,4,
Carolina Gutierrez-Repiso3, Francisca Rodriguez-Pacheco3,
Ailec Ho-Plagaro3, Miguel A Alaminos-Castillo3, Sergio Valdes3,4,
Montserrat Gonzalo3, Raul J. Andrade5,6 & Eduardo Garcia-Fuentes3,7
1Department of Medical Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Immu-
nology, The University of Seville Medical School, Seville, Spain;
2CABIMER-Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative
Medicine (CSIC-University of Seville-UPO-Junta de Andalucia), Seville,
Spain;3Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Biomedical Research
Institute of Malaga (IBIMA), Regional University Hospital, Malaga, Spain;
4CIBER of Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Disorders (CIBERDEM),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Malaga, Spain;5Department of Gastroenter-
ology and Hepatology, Biomedical Research Institute of Malaga (IBIMA),
Virgen de la Victoria Hospital, Malaga, Spain;6CIBER of Hepatic and
Digestive Diseases (CIBEREHD), Instituto Salud Carlos III, Malaga, Spain;
7CIBER Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBERObn), Instituto
Salud Carlos III, Malaga, Spain.
Introduction
Obesity is associated to a pro-inflammatory state with a different pattern of
response from the classical response. Also, obesity is associated to non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD). In this sense, natural killer T (NKT) cells are a
subset of innate immune cells that abundantly reside within the liver and are
readily activated by lipid antigens. However, the phenotype and functional
characteristics of these cells are no clear in the immune homeostasis in obesity.
Methods
Peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cell
(PBMC)  from  17  lean  controls  and  20
morbidly obese (MO) patients with normal levels of liver enzymes ALT, AST and
GGT were isolated to address the association between iNKT cells and ALT, AST
and GGT. PBMC were analyzed by FACS CANTO II flow cytometry.
Results
In PBMC, no differences were observed in the frequency of iNKT cells of MO
and lean subjects. However, into MO group, we found a significant correlation
between iNKT cells and ALT levels (rZ0.611, PZ0.015). No differences were
observed in CD4C and CD8CiNKT cells in PBMC from MO compared with
lean subjects, but a positive correlation between CD4CiNKT cells with ALT
(rZ0.476, PZ0.043) and GGT (rZ0.581, PZ0.029) was found. CD56CNKT
and CD56CiNKT cells were increased in PBMC of MO subjects (P!0.001). The
frequency of CD69CCD25C iNKT cells (early and later activated iNKT) was
significantly increased in PBMC from MO subjects (P!0.001). These activated
iNKT cells presented a significantly and positive correlation with AST (rZ0.677,
PZ0.006) and ALT (rZ0.693, PZ0.004).
Conclusions
MO subjects presented early and later activated lymphocytes and iNKT in PBMC.
The direct association found between iNKT cells, both total and activated, in
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
PBMC and serum levels of liver enzymes ALT and AST suggests that this type of
cells might play an essential role in fatty liver disease associated to obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP811
EP812
The effect of urbanization on adiposity and insulin resistance among
Indonesian
Dicky Tahapary1,3, Farid Kurniawan1, Karin de Ruiter3, Erliyani Sartono3,
Yenny Djuardi2, Taniawati Supali2, Maria Yazdanbakhsh3,
Pradana Soewondo1 & Dante Harbuwono1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Faculty of
Medicine Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia;2Department of
Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia;
3Department of Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
Background
The prevalence of obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2DM) in Indonesia is increasing.
One of the major socio-environmental factors that might contribute to this is
urbanization, which is associated with changes into more sedentary lifestyle and
unhealthy diet. These changes can lead to obesity. The metabolic risks of obesity are
mainly determined by the body fat content. The higher the body fat content the higher
insulin resistance and hence susceptibility of T2DM. The contribution of adiposity to
urban-rural differences of insulin resistance in Indonesia is currently unknown.
Aim
Our study aims to characterize the differences in adiposity and insulin resistance
among urban and rural Indonesian, and to explore the time effects of urbanization.
Methods
We recruited 36 adult male participants with Flores ethnicity from a rural area of
Ende (Flores) and 36-age-sex-ethnic matched participants from an urban area
(Jakarta) who had already moved to Jakarta between 1 and 41 years. We measured
body mass index [BMI (kg/m2)], waist circumference [WC (cm)], waist-hip ratio
(WHR), 4-sites skinfold [biceps SF, triceps SF, supra iliac SF, subscapular SF (cm)],
body fat composition (BIA), fasting glucose (mmol/L), fasting insulin (IU/L), 2h-
glucose post 75g glucose load [PPG (mmol/L)], HbA1c (%) and insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR).
Results
Urban group has significantly higher BMI [24.5(4.7) vs 22.3(4.1); PZ0.042], WC
[84.9(13.4) vs 77.6(11.2); PZ0.014], WHR [0.99(0.062) vs 0.93(0.058); PZ
0.000] and subscapular SF [16.9(9.0) vs 12.1(7.4); PZ0.016]. These differences
translate into significantly higher PPG [7.4(2.6) vs 5.7(1.6); PZ0.002] and HbA1c
[5.5(0.7) vs 5.1(0.6); PZ0.007] among urban group, but no significant difference in
HOMA-IR [1.38(1.05-1.76) vs 1.05(0.76-1.40); PZ0.173]. After adjusting for
age, there are positive correlations between the duration of stay in urban area and
markers of adiposity, such as BMI (rZ0.553, PZ0.014), Fat Percentage (rZ0.465,
PZ0.045),  WC  (rZ0.634,  PZ0.004);  but  not  with  HOMA-IR  (rZ0.301,
PZ0.210).
Conclusion
The people who move to an urban areas have unfavourable adiposity profile which
might put them at higher risk of having insulin resistance and hence T2DM in the
future. These profile differences are correlated with the duration of stay in the urban
area.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP812
EP813
Continuous glucose monitoring for evaluation of glycemic variability
after bariatric surgery
Diana Martins, Luís Cardoso, Carla Baptista, Dírcea Rodrigues,
Luísa Barros, Nuno Vicente, Diana Oliveira, Adriana Lages, Mara Ventura
& Francisco Carrilho
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department of Coimbra
University Hospital Centre, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Neuroglucopenic hypoglycaemia might be an underestimated threat of bariatric
surgery, as Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYBG) or gastric sleeve. We aimed to
evaluate  glucose  variability  after  bariatric  surgery  by  continuous  glucose
monitoring (CGM) in a real-life setting.
Methods
CGM was used in twelve patients with clinical suspicion of hypoglycaemia after
undergoing bariatric surgery (RYBG or sleeve), during seven days. CGM was
through using iProTM2 CGM device (Medtronic, Northridge, CA) in all patients.
Results
Continuous glucose monitoring retrieved a total of 21 960 glucose data points that
were evaluated herein. Ten of the 12 patients (83.3%) had previously undergone
RYBG surgery and only 2 (16.7%) had undergone gastric sleeve, with a mean
time after surgery of 3.25G1.54 years. All patients had at least one episode of
hypoglycaemia below 55 mg/dL (min 3; max 33). Total hypoglycaemia exposure
was
11.79
hours  per  patient  and  CGM.  During  the  monitoring  period,
157(81.35%) out of 193 hypoglycaemic episodes, occurred in the post-prandial
state. Glucose variability was evaluated by MAGE (3.205; RV 0.0-2.8), CONGA
(3.955; RV 3.6-5.5), J-Index (10.94; RV 4.7-23.6) and SD (1.085; RV 0.0-3.0).
Area under the curve for glucose !70 mg/dL was 1.025 and for glucose O180
mg/dL was 1.69.
Conclusions
Glucose  variability  is  exaggerated  after  bariatric  surgery:  hypoglycaemia
occurred mostly in the post-prandial period and glucose variability was increased
by glucose fluctuations, as evidenced by MAGE. As a result, CGM may be a
valuable diagnostic tool and may have a role evaluating treatment response to
dietary modifications, drug therapy or surgical reintervention.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP813
EP814
Extra virgin olive oil and red wine polyphenols modulate fecal
microbiota and reduce metabolic risk factors in high insulin resistant
obese patients
Isabel Moreno-Indias1,3, Lidia Sanchez-Alcoholado1,3, Jose
Carlos Fernandez-Garcia1,2, Daniel Castellano-Castillo1,3,
Fernando Cardona-Diaz1,3 & Maria Isabel Queipo-Ortu
˜o1,3
1Endocrinology Department, Biomedical Research Laboratory, IBIMA,
Malaga, Spain;2Endocrinology Department, Virgen de la Victoria
University Hospital, Malaga, Spain;3Spanish Biomedical Research Centre
in Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain.
Objectives
This study evaluated the prebiotic effect of a moderate intake of extra virgin olive
oil (Evoo) and red wine (Rw) polyphenols on modulating the gut microbiota
composition and the improvement of metabolic risk factors in obese subjects with
high insulin resistance (HIR).
Methodology
10 obese patients with HIR (HOMA-IRO5.5) and 10 lean subject with low
insulin  resistance
(HOMA-IR!  3.3)  were  included  in  a  randomized  and
controlled  intervention  study.  After  a  washout  period  both  study  groups
consumed a normo-caloric Mediterranean diet with added Evoo (50 g/dayl) and
the same diet plus red wine (270 ml /day) over a 30-day period for each one.
Results
The Chao and Shannon indices of each study group suggested similar bacterial
richness and diversity in the fecal samples between both study groups. 16S rRNA
pyrosequencing  showed  that  the  dominant  bacterial  composition  differ
significantly between the study groups after the two diet intake periods respect
to their basal level. In HIR patients, polyphenols from Eoov and Rw significantly
increased the number of fecal bifidobacteria and Butyricimonas (intestinal barrier
protectors)  and  significantly  decreased  the  abundance  of  Rikenellaceae,
Desulfovibrionaceae and Prevotella (opportunist pathogen and mucin-degrading
bacterial). Moreover, in the HIR patients, triglycerides, glucose and CRP levels
decreased and HDL cholesterol levels increased after the two intake periods and
this was associated with a rise in Bifidobacterium and Butyricimonas and a
decrease in Clostridium, respectively.
Conclusion
A Mediterranean diet supplemented with Evoo and Rw polyphenols increased
HDL levels and decreased triglyceride and CRP levels in HIR patients, improving
associated cardiovascular risk. Changes in gut microbiota in these HIR patients
could be responsible for the improvement of these metabolic markers. Modulation
of the gut microbiota by Evoo and Rw polyphenols could be an effective strategy
to manage metabolic diseases
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP814
EP815
Prevalence of obesity in an Algerian adult population
Fafa Nadira1,2, Meskine Djamila1,2, Bouzid Aicha1,2, Fedala Saida1,2 &
Kedad Lamia1,2
1Laboratory of Endocrinology And Metabolism, Algiers, Algeria;2Ibn Ziri
Bologhine Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
The epidemiological transition has resulted in a major increase in the prevalence
of obesity in our country. Obesity is closely associated with chronic diseases such
as type 2 diabetes, hypertension and dyslipidemia.
The aim of our study is assessing the prevalence of general obesity, central
obesity
(OA),  associated  risk  factors
(type2
diabetes,  hypertension  and
dyslipidemia) and try to provide information on determinants of obesity in
Algerian adult.
Methods
This was a cross sectional study conducted among 2210 subjects (1583 women
and 627 men) aged 18 to 64 years old, living in Algiers (Algeria).
Subjects  were  randomized,  anthropometric  parameters,  socio  demographic
situation, information about the food habits and physical activity were collected
using a questionnary.
Fasting blood glucose, cholestrol, triglycerids and blood pressure were measured.
Results
The prevalence of obesity (BMI O 30 kg/m2) was 24.9% (12.7% for males and
66.4% for females).
The prevalence of central obesity (WC O 80 cm for women and 94 cm for men)
was 66.4%, 41% for males and 76.4% for females.
Multi  variable  logistic  regression  showed  that  elderly,  female  gender,  low
educational level, a history of familial or personal obesity and menopause were at
risk of obesity classified by BMI or WC.Wheras a young age, a higher level of
education, male gender, celibacy and high physical activity were at lower risk of
obesity.
Obese subjects defined by BMI or Waist circumference had an increased risk of
type 2 diabetes, hypertension and dyslipidemia.
Conclusion
The characterization of these factors will contribute to defining more effective and
specific strategies to screen and control obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP815
EP816
Obesity may influence on measurements of choroid thickness in optical
coherence tomography
Erhan Yumusak1, Senay Arikan Durmaz2, Hatice Ayhan Guler1,
Zehra Bacanli2 & Ayse Carlioglu3
1Department of Ophthalmology, Kirikkale University, Faculty of Medicine,
Kirikkale, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology, Kirikkale University,
Faculty of Medicine, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Department of Endocrinology,
Erzurum Regional Training and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey.
Introduction and aims
It is known that obesity is associated with retinal microvascular changes. Optical
coherence tomography (OCT), a new imaging technique, is used to visualize the
choroid. In addition, OCT can also give more beneficial information about
systemic and eye diseases. We aim to investigate whether or not obesity may
impact on choroid and macula thickness.
Material and methods
Forty-four subjects who were apply for obesity in our Endocrinology outpatient
clinic [mean age 34.47G8.10 years, body mass index (BMI) 40.11G8.02 kg/m2]
and 44 age-matched healthy control subjects (mean age 31.18G7.77 years; BMI
20.95G1.86 kg/m2) were included in our study. All of subjects in obesity group
were selected according to BMIR30 kg/m2 whereas control group was selected
according to BMI!25 kg/m2. Anthropometric measurements, routine systemic
evaluations and eye examinations were performed. The central fovea thickness
(FT), the central fovea choroidal thickness (FCT), the thicknesses of nasal 500
(N500) micron and nasal 1500 (N1500) micron, and the thicknesses of temporal
500 micron (T500) and temporal 1500 (T1500) micron were measured by using
enhanced-depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT).
Results
It was found that measurements of FT, FCT, T500, T1500, N 500 in obese group
were different from control group (250.94 mm vs. 266.04 mm in FT PZ0.004,
345.84 mm vs.313.77 mm in FCT PZ0.007, 343.36 mm vs. 313.95 mm in T500
PZ0.010,
334.47 mm  vs.
310.04 mm  in  T1500
PZ0.035,
340.05 mm  vs.
310.54 mm in N500 PZ0.014). However measurement of N1500 point was not
significantly different from control group. We also found that there was only a
negative correlation between BMI and central foveal thickness (rZK0.285, PZ
0.09) by using Pearson’s correlation analysis.
Conclusions
As a result, we showed that the choroid thickness in obese person is increase
significantly. Therefore, obesity may influence on measurements of choroid
thickness by OCT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP816
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP817
Effects of bariatric surgery on blood pressure of non-hypertensive
obese patients
Joa˜o Sérgio Neves1, Sofia Castro Oliveira1,2, Pedro Souteiro1,2,
Rita Bettencourt-Silva1,2, Daniela Magalha˜es1,2, Maria Manuel Costa1,2,
Ana Saavedra1,2, Joana Oliveira1,2, Filipe Cunha1,2, Eva Lau1,2,
César Esteves1,2, Sandra Belo1,2, Ana Cristina Santos4, Paula Freitas1,2,
Ana Varela1,3, Joana Queirós1,3, Flora Correia3,5, Davide Carvalho1,2 &
Grupo Amtco3
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, São João
Hospital Center, Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal;2Instituto de Investiga
¸ão e Inovaça˜o em Saúde, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Multidisciplinary Group for Surgical Treatment of
Obesity, Sa˜o João Hospital Center, Porto, Portugal;4Clinical Epidemiology,
Predictive Medicine and Public Health Department of FMUP, Porto,
Portugal;5Faculty of Nutrition and Food Sciences of University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Increased blood pressure (BP) above O115/75 mmHg presents an independent
association with cardiovascular events. Although there is a clear benefit of
bariatric surgery on BP of hypertensive patients, the impact in non-hypertensive
patients remains largely unknown. Therefore, the aim of our work was to evaluate
the impact of bariatric surgery on BP of non-hypertensive obese patients.
Methods
We evaluated a cohort of 224 non-hypertensive obese patients (90.8% women)
that were submitted to bariatric surgery. We analyzed systolic BP (SBP) and
diastolic  BP
(DBP)  12  months  after  surgery.  The  impact  of  preoperative
parameters age, sex, BMI, waist-to-hip ratio, SBP, DBP, diabetes, dyslipidemia,
smoking, glomerular filtration rate, C-reactive protein; type of surgery (adjustable
gastric band, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass or sleeve gastrectomy) and the weight loss
after surgery was also assessed. The statistical analysis was done with Student’s
t-Test, Pearson correlation and multiple regression.
Results
We observed a significant reduction of SBP (122.3G10.9 vs 116.9G14.5 mmHg,
P!0.001) and PAD (77.5G8.4 vs 73.1G9.1 mmHg, P!0.001) in the 12 months
after  surgery.  The  subgroup  of  patients  with  initial-SBP
130-140 mmHg
presented a greater reduction of SBP (K13.7 vs K0.2 mmHg, P!0.001) and
DBP (K7.3 vs K2.5 mmHg, P!0.001). The reduction of SBP was positively
associated with initial-SBP (bZ0.975, P!0.001) and weight loss (bZ0.202,
PZ0.040), and negatively with age (bZK0.249, PZ0.030), BMI (bZK0.549,
PZ0.030) and initial-DBP (bZK0.331, PZ0.015). The reduction of DBP was
independently and positively associated with initial-DBP (bZ0.769, P!0.001)
and  negatively  with  age
(bZK0.135,  PZ0.044)  and  BMI  (bZK0.335,
PZ0.021). The type of surgery and the other parameters analyzed did not have
a significant impact on SBP or DBP variation.
Conclusion
Bariatric surgery contributes to a significant reduction of BP in non-hypertensive
obese patients. The benefit appears to be more directly related to weight loss than
to type of surgery. The impact of the procedure is greater in patients with higher
initial-SBP, and smaller in older patients and those with higher BMI.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP817
EP818
Metabolically healthy obesity: exploring the paradox
Mara Ventura, Adriana Lages, Dírcea Rodrigues, Patrícia Oliveira,
Miguel Melo, Diana Martins, Diana Oliveira & Francisco Carrilho
University and Hospital Center of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
Obesity is a chronic disease associated with multiple comorbidities, defined by
BMI, without considering the metabolic state of the patient. There are few data on
the proportion of obese patients without metabolic syndrome (MS).
Objective
To characterize patients considered to be metabolically healthy (MH) followed at
the obesity outpatient clinic of one University Hospital, and to compare this group
with a group of obese patients with MS.
Material and methods
We retrospectively studied 300 patients. We collected information about clinical
and  demographic  parameters,  body  composition,  biochemical  profile  and
abdominal ultrasound. We used the criteria of NCEP ATPIII to define MS;
patients without MS were considered to be MH.
Results
A total of 69.3% patients (nZ208) were considered MH. MH patients had an age
of 40.9G12.6 y, 77.9% were female, had a weight of 107.2G21.6 Kg, BMI of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
40.5G6.7 kg/m2 (53.2% with obesity class III), waist circumference of 112.4G
10.9 cm and fat mass of 44.7G7%. The most frequent comorbidities were
hypertension (63.2%), hepatic steatosis (47.2%), psychiatric disorders (43.8%),
dyslipidemia (43.3%), osteoarthritis (42.3%) and gallbladder lithiasis/cholecys-
tectomy
(17.5%).  There  was  no  statistically  significant  difference  between
patients with and without MS regarding gender, age, obesity class, body weight,
BMI, waist circumference and % fat mass. Statistically significant difference were
observed between the groups in glycemic parameters, blood pressure, HDL-C,
LDL-C, TG and osteoarthritis.
Conclusion
There was a high prevalence of MH obese patients, who differed from their non-
healthy  counterparts  regarding  glycemic  parameters,  blood  pressure,  lipid
metabolism and osteoarthritis (more prevalent in the patients with MS). However,
more than half of MH patients had one or more conditions considered to be a
comorbidity of obesity. A long-term prospective evaluation will be required to
understand if there is a MH obesity or if this is inevitably associated with
increased morbidity/mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP818
EP819
Changes in testosterone levels and sex hormone-binding globulin levels
in extremely obese men after bariatric surgery
Patchaya Boonchaya-anant1, Nitchakarn Laichuthai1,
Preaw Suwannasrisuk1,2 & Thiti Snabboon1
1Department of Medicine, Hormonal and Metabolic Disorders Research
Unit, Excellence Center for Diabetes, Hormone, and Metabolism, and
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Chul,
Bangkok, Thailand;2Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of
Medicine, Naresuan University, Phitsanulok, Thailand.
Objective
Obesity is a risk factor for hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism in men. Increase in
body weight was found to be associated with decrease testosterone level and sex
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) level. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the change in testosterone levels in extremely obese men after bariatric surgery.
Methods
This is a prospective study including 29 morbidly obese men undergoing bariatric
surgery. Main outcomes were changes in serum levels of total testosterone (TT),
free  testosterone
(cFT),  SHBG,  Estradiol,  adiponectin  and  leptin  at
1 and
6 months after bariatric surgery.
Results
The mean ages of patients were 31G8 years and the mean BMI was 57.8G11.2
kg/m2. Sixteen patients underwent Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and 13 patients
underwent sleeve gastrectomy. At baseline, 22 patients (75.9%) had low TT levels
(!10.4 nmol/L) and 27 patients (93.1%) had low cFT levels (!0.31 nmol/L).
Total testosterone and SHBG levels increased significantly at 1 month after surgery
(PZ!0.001) whereas cFT levels have not changed. At 6 months after surgery, TT,
cFT and SHBG levels increased significantly (all p-valuesZ!0.001) and 21
patients (72.4%) had normal TT levels. There were no changes in estradiol levels
either at 1 month or 6 months after surgery. Leptin levels decreased and adiponectin
levels increased significantly after surgery. Early increases in TT levels were
associated with increases in SHBG levels (RZ0.472, PZ0.042) but not with
changes in body weight, BMI, adiponectin or leptin.
Conclusions
Increases in TT and SHBG levels occurred early at 1 month after bariatric surgery
while improvements in cFT levels were observed at 6 months after bariatric
surgery. No change in estradiol levels was found. Changes in total testosterone
levels tend to be correlated with SHBG levels but not with body weight or
adipokines levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP819
EP820
Neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio and its relationship with insulin resistance
in obesity
Serdar Karakaya1, Mustafa Altay1,2, Fatma Kaplan Efe1, Ibrahim Karadag1
& Oktay Unsal1
1Keçioren Education and Research Hospital Department of Internal
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;2Keçioren Education and Research Hospital
Department of Endocrinology, Ankara, Turkey.
Aim
In  our  study  we  aimed  to  investigate  neutrophil/lymphocyte
(N/L)  ratio,
variations in leukocytes and leukocyte subtypes and relationship between N/L
ratio and insulin resistance (IR) in obesity.
Material and methods
In this study 250 obese patients data were scanned retrospectively and 96 patients
that are convenient to inclusion criteria and has complete file information were
included  in  the  study.  Forty  healthy  individual  with  similar  age  and  sex
distribution were selected among 120 personal medical records and included the
study as control group. Patients 8 hours fasting blood glucose levels, insulin levels
and hemogram parameters were determined. BMI and HOMA-IR values were
calculated from patients weight and height.
Findings
White blood cells were significantly found to be increased in obese patients
(8764G2023 and 7712G1932 respectively, PZ0.006). Neutrophil and lympho-
cyte counts were significantly higher in obese patients than control group (for
neutrophils 5359G1.788 and 4585G1.473 respectively, PZ0.017, for lympho-
cytes 2615G627 and 2287G553 respectively, PZ0.005). However there was no
statistical significant difference for N/L ratios between two groups (2.18G1.00
and 2.10G0.83 respectively, PZ0.658). Neutrophil numbers were found to be
higher in IR obese than non IR obese (5780G1628 and 4980G1838, PZ0.02).
N/L ratio was found to be higher in IR obese compared to non IR obese (2.39G
1.06 - 1.97G0.91 PZ0.04). A positive correlation was found between insulin
resistance and neutrophil, WBC counts. Another positive correlation was found
between insulin level and N/L ratio, WBC and neutrophil counts.
Results
In our study leukocyte numbers and leukocyte subtypes were determined to be
higher  in  obese  compared  to  healthy  individuals.  However  N/L  ratio  was
significantly increased only in obesity with insulin resistance. Further studies are
needed to clearly demonstrate the relationship between N/L ratio and insulin
resistance or inflammation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP820
EP821
Association of body fat distribution and carotid intima media thicknesss
with Vitamin D in obese premenopausal women
Ozen Dedeoglu1, Guzin Fidan Yaylalı2, Duygu Herek3, Senay Topsakal2,
Fulya Akin2 & Hande Senol4
1Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Pamukkale
University, Kinikli Campus, Denizli, 20070, Turkey;2Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Pamukkale
University, Kinikli Campus, Denizli, 20070, Turkey;3Department of
Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Pamukkale University, Kinikli Campus,
Denizli, 20070, Turkey;4Department of Bioistatistics, Faculty of Medicine,
Pamukkale University, Kinikli Campus, Denizli, 20070, Turkey.
Introduction
It has been demonstrated that there are differences in the effect of body mass index
(BMI) on the serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels (25-OH D); differences appeared
stronger in subjects with higher BMI. In this study we aimed to assess the
association between 25-OH D status and body fat distribution and caratid intima
medai thickness.
Methods
86 obese premenapousal women (aged 17-55 years) and 56 women with normal
BMI took  part  in  this  study.  Antropometric  measurements  including  waist
circumferences (WC) were done. Serum concentrations of fasting blood glucose,
insulin, calcium, PTH, 25-OH D were measured. Body fat distrubution was
evaluated by ultarsonography. Body fat thickness in four regions and carotid
intima media thickness (CIMT) were measured. Total fat and fat ratio were also
measured by Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis (BIA).
Results
Visceral (VFT), subcutaneous (SFT), preperitoneal fat thickness (PFT) and the
CIMT were significantly higher in obese subjects (P ! 0.01). 25-OH D were
similar and low in both groups. (13.38 ng/ml in obese and 13.99 ng/ml in controls).
25-OH  D  were  correlated  negatively  with  waist  circumference
(PZ0.025,
RZK0.263) and VFT (PZ0.002, RZK0.366). Whereas PTH levels were
positively  correlated  with  WC
(PZ0.042,  RZC0.241).  There  wasn’t  any
correlation with 25-OH D and SFT and PFT. Total fat mass measured by BIA
was also negatively correlated wtih 25-OH D. CIMT was negatively correlated
with 25-OH D (PZ0.028, RZK0.269) and positively correlated with PTH
(PZ0.018, RZC0.291).
Conclusion
There  are several  studies  investigated  the relation between vitamin D  and
adiposity. They have different results concerning the relation between Vitamin D
and BMI,waist circumference and fat distribution measured by different methods.
Ethnicity, gender, and age may play a role in mediating this relation. This study
showed that in premenopausal Turkish obese women, vitamin D may have a
contributing factor on fat distribution so on cardiovascular risks in obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP821
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP822
Visceral adiposity index as a marker of hepatic steatosis in overweight
and obese premenopausal women
Evangeline Vassilatou1, Dimitra Vassiliadi1, Helen Lazaridou2,
Nikitas Koutsomitopoulos1, Nikolaos Kelekis2, Dimitrios Hadjidakis1 &
George Dimitriadis3
1Endocrine Unit, 2nd Department of Internal Medicine - Propaedeutic,
“Attikon” University Hospital, Haidari, Athens, Greece;22nd Department of
Radiology, “Attikon” University Hospital, Haidari, Athens, Greece;
32nd Department of Internal Medicine - Propaedeutic,“Attikon” University
Hospital, Haidari, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Visceral adiposity index (VAI), initially developed as an indicator of visceral
adipose function for the assessment of cardiometabolic risk, has been also
proposed for the detection of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). However,
the diagnostic performance of VAI as a marker of hepatic steatosis (HS) is still
under investigation.
Objective
To evaluate the accuracy of VAI as a marker of HS in a cohort of overweight and
obese premenopausal women and to compare diagnostic performance of VAI and
of two other HS markers: fatty liver index (FLI) and lipid accumulation product
(LAP) index.
Design
Prospective, cross-sectional study.
Patients - methods
Anthropometric measurements, biochemical testing and abdominal ultrasono-
graphy after excluding causes of secondary liver disease were performed in 110
overweight and obese premenopausal women, aged 18-45 years, including 40
women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). The three markers of HS - VAI,
FLI and LAP - were calculated. The diagnostic performance of VAI, FLI and LAP
was assessed with receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis.
Results
NAFLD was detected in 71/110 (64.5%) women (31 PCOS and 40 non PCOS) by
ultrasonography. VAI, FLI and LAP values were higher in HS(C) compared
to HS(K) women [2.3G1.8 vs. 1.3G0.7 (P!0.01), 68.4G28.1 vs. 33.3G22.7
(P!0.001) and 60.8G41.7 vs. 28.6G13.9 (P!0.001) respectively]. The area
under the curve (AUROC) for VAI, FLI and LAP was 0.71, 0.82 and 0.79,
respectively.
Conclusions
These data indicate that calculation of VAI is useful for detecting NAFLD in
overweight and obese premenopausal women. However, FLI and LAP seem to
have a superior diagnostic performance.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP822
EP823
Hif-1a is positively associated with scavenger receptors Lox-1, Cxcl16
and Msr1 in adipose tissue
Concepción Santiago-Fernandez1, Jose M. Garcia-Almeida1,2, Luis Oca
˜a-
Wilhelmi3, Alejandro Rodriguez-Morata4, Carolina Gutierrez-Repiso5,
Monica Tomé1, Juan Alcaide1, Francisco J Tinahones1,2, Franz Tatzber6,
Edith Pursch7, Eduardo García-Fuentes2,5 & Lourdes Garrido-Sánchez1,2
1Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Biomedical Research Institute
of Malaga (IBIMA), Virgen de la Victoria Hospital, Malaga, Spain;2CIBER
Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBERObn), Instituto Salud
Carlos III, Malaga, Spain;3Department of Surgery, Biomedical Research
Institute of Malaga (IBIMA), Virgen de la Victoria Hospital, Malaga, Spain;
4Department of Angiology and Vascular Surgery, Biomedical Research
Institute of Malaga (IBIMA), Virgen de la Victoria Hospital, Malaga, Spain;
5Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Biomedical Research Institute
of Malaga (IBIMA), Regional University Hospital, Malaga, Spain;6Medical
University of Graz, Centre of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Pathophy-
siology & Immunology, Graz, Austria;7University of Applied Sciences
Technikum Wien, Institute of Biochemistry, Vienna, Austria.
Introduction
HIF-1a, a hypoxia marker, is an important factor for transcriptional regulation of cell
metabolism and the adaptation to cellular stress. It modulates the function of
phagocytic cells by stimulating surface receptors such as scavenger receptors. But little
is known on their relationship in adipose tissue, whose increase has been associated
with an increased risk of atherosclerosis. The aim of this study is to analyze in adipose
tissue the association between mRNA expression levels of HIF-1a and different
scavenger receptors, and their relationship with the presence of obesity.
Design
We study in 21 normal weight and 26 morbidly obese patients (MO) the mRNA gene
expression levels of HIF-1a and different scavenger receptors (lectin-like oxLDL-1
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
(LOX-1), macrophage scavenger receptor 1 (MSR1) and chemokine (C-X-C motif)
ligand 16 (CXCL16)) in visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT).
Results
HIF-1a and LOX-1 mRNA gene expressions are increased in VAT from MO patients
(PZ0.025 vs. PZ0.003, respectively), but not in SAT. MSR-1 and CXCL16 mRNA
gene expression levels are higher in MO patients in VAT and SAT (VAT: PZ0.001
vs. P!0.001, respectively, and SAT: P!0.001 vs. P!0.001, respectively). HIF-1a
mRNA gene expression in VAT has positively correlated with the weight, body mass
index and waist circumference, and negatively with serum HDL and adiponectin
levels. HIF-1a mRNA gene expression is positively associated with MSR1 and
CXCL16 in VAT and SAT, and positively with LOX-1 mRNA expression only
in VAT.
Conclusions
In this study we demonstrate the positive association in the adipose tissue between the
mRNA gene expression level of HIF-1a, a hypoxia marker, and different scavenger
receptors.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP823
EP824
Pro-inflammatory cytokines responses to acute exercise in athletes and
sedentary controls: association with body composition and insulin
sensitivity
Marina Djelic1,4, Vladimir Trajkovic2,4, Mirjana Sumarac Dumanovic3,4,
Sanja Mazic1,4, Tijana Durmic1,4, Rada Jeremic1,4, Ankica Bjelic1,4 &
Dragan Micic3,4
1Institute of Physiology, Belgrade, Serbia;2Institute of Immunology,
Belgrade, Serbia;3Institute of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Diseases of
Metabolism, Belgrade, Serbia;4Faculty of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Balance between pro- and anti- inflammatory cytokines is necessary for the
physiological  functioning  of  the  immune  system.  A  chronic  systemic
inflammation is one of the causes of insulin resistance in obesity.
The aim of this study was to investigate the pro-inflammatory cytokines and
visfatin response to an single bout acute exercise in athletes and non-athletes, as
well  as  the  possible  relationship  pro-inflammatory  cytokines  with  body
composition and insulin sensitivity.
Fifteen athletes with high percentage of body fat (the elite water polo players) and
fifteen sedentary subjects participated in this study (age (years) 20G2; 20G1,
respectively). All subjects were exposed to anthropometric measurements and
one bout exercise test on treadmill in order to examine acute changes of cytokines.
Blood samples were obtained at baseline levels, immediately after the exercise
test and 30 minutes after recovery. Separated serum or plasma were used for
cytokines (MIF, IL-17 and IFNg) and hormone (visfatin, insulin) ELISA analysis
and glucose measurement. Insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) was calculated.
Only, IL-17 level was significantly higher at rest and at the end of the test in
athletes  compared  to  non-athletes
(P!0.05).  In  athletes,  MIF  and  visfatin
concentration increased significantly after exercise, but in recovery visfatin
reduced  and  MIF  increased
(P!0.05).  IFNg  level  in  both  groups  was
significantly lower in recovery compared to the end of the test
(P!0.05).
There is no significant correlation between the parameters of body composition
and concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the baseline values in both
groups. In non-athletes, HOMA-IR was positively correlated with the level of
IFNg and IL-17 (P!0.05).
In conclusion, our findings show that acute exercise leads to an increase in pro-
inflammatory  cytokines  in  athletes.  The  positive  correlation  between  pro-
inflammatory cytokines  and HOMA  IR in sedentary  subjects may indicate
reduced insulin sensitivity and increased risk of earlier development of the
metabolic syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP824
EP825
Physical function, quality of life and energy expenditure during
activities of daily living in post-bariatric surgery patients and
obese individuals
Fabiane Monteiro2, Diego Augusto Nascimento Ponce2, Humberto Silva2,
Fabio Pitta2 & Alexandre JF Carrilho1
1Serviço de Endocrinologia - Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Londrina
- PR, Brazil; 2Departamento de Fisioterapia - Universidade Estadual de
Londrina, Londrina - PR, Brazil.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Bariatric surgery (BS) is an effective method to weight loss, however, some
patients experience persistence of physical inactivity or even weight gain over the
years. Furthermore, It is not clear if some surgical techniques, mainly those with
disabsortive components, could be involved in the low physical performance
through interfering with nutritional status This study aimed to evaluate physical
function (PF), quality of life (QOL) and energy expenditure (EE) during activities
of daily living in post-BS patients compared with obese individuals without BS.
Methods
Forty two subjects were included in the study: 21 post-BS patients (3 to 4 years
post Roux-en-Y gastric bypass technique) with stable weight for at least 6 months
(16 women, 41G11 years old, BMIZ28G4 kg.mK2) (group PO); and 21 obese
individuals without BS (16 women, 44G9 years old, BMIZ44G6 kg.mK2)
(group OB). PF was objectively assessed by the Glittre and Modified Glittre
Activities of Daily Living (ADL) tests. QOL (SF-36), EE was assessed by the
multisensor sensewear armband activity monitor during ADL, and the body
composition was determined by bioelectrical impedance.
Results
OB  group  had  worse  PF  (OBZ224G76  seconds;  POZ143G39  seconds;
P!0.0001) as well as QOL (P!0.05 for all SF-36 domains) when compared to
PO group. OB had also higher total EE in the Glittre ADL-test; however, 63% of
the activity time was in low intensity EE. In the Glittre modified protocol, OB had
also worse performance than PO when walking up/downstairs, rising/sitting in a
chair and moving objects in shelves. In both groups, better PF was moderately-
to-strongly correlated with lower percentage of fat mass.
Conclusions
Post-BS patients have better PF, QOL and perform activities under lower total EE
than obese subjects, suggesting that BS is involved in recovering physical
performance in these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP825
EP826
The effect of gastric bypass surgery on lipid profile in obese patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Sedat Cetin1, Fatih Sumer2, Ibrahim Sahin1 & Cuneyt Kayaalp2
1Inonu University, Endocrinolgy and Metabolism, Malatya, Turkey;2Inonu
University, General Surgery, Malatya, Turkey.
Introduction
Few studies have investigated the effect of gastric bypass surgery on lipid profile
in obese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. We aimed to evaluate changes in
lipid profile in obese diabetic patients undergoing Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
(RYGB) surgery.
Method
We retrospectively analysed 71 obese type 2 diabetic patients (46 women, 25
men) who underwent RYGB surgery. Weight, body mass index (BMI), total
cholesterol
(TC),  high-density-lipoprotein  cholesterol
(HDLc),  low-density-
lipoprotein cholesterol
(LDLc) and triglyceride
(TG) levels were evaluated
before and 3 months after the surgery.
The study was conducted at the Inonu University, Turgut Ozal Medical Center.
The same surgery team performed all operative procedures laparoscopically.
Institutional ethics committee approved the study protocol.
Results
Mean age of the patients was 44.96G9.66 years. Pre-operative mean BMI and
weight were 45.72G8.66 kg/m2  and 138.78G26.15 kg respectively. 3 months
after the surgery both mean BMI and weight significantly decreased to 33.68G
6.15 kg/m2 (P!0.001) and 101.55G24.96 kg (PZ!0.001) respectively.
3 months after the RYGB, there was a significant decrease in TC (213.62G45.33
to
173.50G35.29 mg/dl,  P!0.001)  and  TG
(272.53G320.96
to
134.93G
58.52 mg/dl,  P!0.001)  and  HDLc
(40.18G9,59
to
37.19G10.17 mg/dl,
P!0.005) levels. However, decrease in LDLc (123.31G42.32 to 109.52G
30.83 mg/dl, PZ0.126) level was not statistically significant.
Changes (D) from preoperative TC (K40.27G48.74 vs. - 26.50G54.70 mg/dl,
P!0.001),  LDLc  (12.30G48.02  vs.  K11.02G42.33 mg/dl,  PZ0.058)  and
HDLc  (K1.67G11.47  vs.  K3.9G9.31 mg/dl,  P!0.006)  levels  were  more
prominent in patients with BMI R40 kg/m2 compared to the BMI! 40 kg/m2
respectively.
Conclusions
Our results indicate that RYGB may have beneficial effects on TC, LDLc and TG
but not on HDLc levels in obese patients with type 2 DM. Longer follow up
period is required to validate our results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP826
EP827
Evaluation of the use of parenteral nutrition premixed bags vs
individualized nutrition in our hospital
Inmaculada Gonzalez-Molero1, Francisco Sanchez Torralvo1, Rosario
Vallejo Mora1, Monserrat Gonzalo-Marin1, Victoria Contreras Bolivar1,
C Gallego Fernandez2, Gabriel Olveira1 & Francisco Tinahones1
1Endocrinology Department, Regional Universitary Hospital, Málaga,
Spain;2Pharmacy Department, Regional Universitary Hospital, Má
˜aga,
Spain.
Introduction
Parenteral nutrition (PN) is indicated in patients in which gastrointestinal tract is
inaccessible  or  is  severely  affected.  In  our  hospital,  specialists  often  use
commercial three-compartment bags of PN that provide standard nutritional
requirements  regardless  a  total  parenteral  nutrition
(TPN)  with  macro  and
micronutrients adjusted to each patient by Endocrinology and Nutrition Service.
Objectives
To assess the use of commercial premixed PN with respect to TPN with adequate
daily requirements.Material and Methods: Cross-sectional study carried out during
four months in patients who are treated with commercial premixed PN in our
hospital. Pharmacy provided us the list of patients treated with that preparations.
We collected the following variables: who indicates it, reason, duration, degree of
malnutrition, monitoring performed and decision after our evaluation.
Results
Data from 104 patients were analyzed, 63% men. Average age: 63.5G16.8 years.
Reason for hospitalization: 58.8% elective surgery, emergency surgery 20.5% and
20.5% others. Reason to start commercial PN: 39.6% postoperative ileus, need of
intestinal rest 36.6% and obstruction 6.9%.Our performance was accomplished by
specialist interconsultation in 66.7% and the rest was for listing of Pharmacy (not
advised by their attending physician).Mean time with commercial PN: 2.4G
2.1 days; 1.97 days in patients with interconsultation specialist vs 3.5 days when
we were advised by Pharmacy (PZ0.001). 37.9% had moderate malnutrition and
35.6% had severe malnutrition.Commercial PN covered calories requirements in
21.1% and protein requirements in 5.6%. 22.8% had no indication of PN. 46.9% of
the prescribed commercial PN advised by pharmacy were wrongly indicated vs
9% of commercial PN advised by interconsultation After our evaluation: 70.3%
were changed to TPN and 19.8% were suspended.
Conclusion
Despite the availability of a Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, there are a high
percentage of patients who are administered commercial premixed PN without
adequate indication and a high percentage of patientsin which daily nutritional
requirements are not warranted and need an individualized parenteral nutrition.
(PZ0.001)
After our evaluation: 70.3% were changed to TPN and 19.8% were suspended.
Conclusion
Despite the availability of a Nutrition Service, there are a high percentage of
patients  who  are  administered  commercial  premixed  PN  without  adequate
indication  and  a  high  percentage  of  patientsin  which  daily  nutritional
requirements are not warranted and need an individualized parenteral nutrition.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP827
EP828
Hormonal response to physical exercise
Codruta Lencu1, Teodora Alexescu2, Monica Lencu3 &
Carmen Georgescu1
1Department of Endocrinology, “Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;24th Medical Clinic, “Iuliu
Hatieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;
3Medical Centrum “Interservisan”, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Aims
The effects of physical exercise on the endocrine system were monitored.
Material and method
The study included 60 young and healthy subjects.
The subjects were divided into two groups:
- group A (30) performed anaerobic exercise for 50 minutes: running on the
treadmill at a speed of 8 km/hour, walking on the treadmill at a speed of
5 km/hour, and running on the treadmill at a speed of 8 km/hour;
- group B (30) performed aerobic exercise for 50 minutes: running on the
treadmill at a speed of 15 km/hour, walking on the treadmill at a speed of
5 km/hour, and running on the treadmill at a speed of 15 km/hour.
All the studied subjects underwent the measurement of GH, PRL, cortisolemia,
cathecolamines, insulinemia, estradiol before exercise, at the end of exercise, at
one hour, 6 hours and 24 hours after exercise.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
During physical activity, a significant increase of GH in both groups occurred; the
values remained high at one hour after exercise.
PRL increased during physical training proportionally to the difficulty of training
in all the studied women, and returned to its initial value after the cessation of
training.
Cortisol varied proportionally to the intensity of training. Physical exercise
determined an increase of catecholamine secretion; the response was more
marked for noradrenaline.We found a significant depression of insulin;estradiol
secretion increased significantly in both groups of women;the values remained
high at 24hours after cessation of physical training.
Conclusion
The  imbalance  between  energy  consumption  and  the  much  higher  energy
expenditure causes the onset of neuroendocrine mechanisms of adaptation of the
body to increased physical exercise.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP828
EP829
Predicting the risk of colonic adenomatous polyps in obese patients by
TANITA: a new and practical method
Ozlem Yonem1, Hatice Sebile Dokmetas2, Hilmi Ataseven3, Hatice Ozer4 &
Fatih Kilicli5
1Department of Gastroenterology, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey;
2Department of Endocrinology, Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul,
Turkey;3Department of Gastroenterology, State Hospital, Malatya, Turkey;
4Department of Pathology, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey;
5Department of Endocrinology, Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Background/aim
Visceral obesity rather than generalized obesity has been recognized as a risk
factor for development of colonic adenomatous polyps. We aimed to to find out
whether there is association between the obesity parameters determined by
TANITA such as fat percent, body mass index (BMI) and visceral fat rating and
prevalence of colonic adenomatous polyps.
Material and methods
We conducted a cross-sectional study using a consecutive series of 231 cases who
underwent  colonoscopy  during  December
2012  to  September
2013  at  the
Cumhuriyet  University  Hospital.  The  device  TANITA  BC
420  MA  High
Capacity Body Composition Analyser with integral printer(Tokyo, Japan) was
used for determining obesity parameters mentioned above.
Results
We have found in our study that there was not any association of body mass index
with colonic adenomatous polyp  prevalance. However we  have found that
patients described as overweight and obese had significantly higher colonic polyp
prevalance than patients described as healthy. We also found that patients with a
visceral fat rating of O12 had a nearly three fold prevalance of adenomatous
polyps.
Conclusion
In conclusion for the first time in the literature we used TANITA measurements to
predict the patients at risk of colonic adenomatous polyps. We think that our
finding of nearly three fold increased prevalance of adenomatous polyps above
the cut off visceral fat value of 12 is important and can help us detect which
patients need screening colonoscopy. However studies with larger number of
patients are neeeded to confirm our results.
Keywords: Colonoscopy, colonic adenomatous polyps, TANITA, visceral fat
rating
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP829
EP830
Identification of adipogenesis specific microRNAs
M. Lisa Cherradi1, Nina Perwitz1, Ralf Werner2 & Georg E. Brabant1
1Department of Internal Medicine 1, University of Luebeck, Luebeck,
Germany;2Division of Experimental Paediatric Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University of
Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.
Introduction
Obesity associated with the risks of metabolic syndrome is a rising problem in
Western societies but shows a wide depot- and sex-specific variation. A better
understanding of the regulatory mechanisms underlying this different depot- and
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
sex-specific role is crucial to identify potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets.
MicroRNAs are recently recognized important players in adipogenesis and fat
metabolism. They post-transcriptionally regulate diverse biological processes,
e.g. the proliferation and differentiation of cells. Here we studied the depot and
sex hormone-specific regulation of microRNAs during differentiation. Methods:
Inguinal (ING) and epididymal (EPI) white adipose tissue (WAT) of SV40
transfected, stable murine cell lines were used to evaluate fat depot specific
expression  profiles  of  selected  microRNAs  during  the  development  from
preadipocytes  to  mature  fat  cells  both  under  control  conditions  and  when
chronically stimulated with  dihydrotestosterone
(DHT). Using a microarray
approach microRNA candidates which were differentially regulated were identified.
Adipocyte differentiation was monitored by Oil-Red-O staining and western blot
analysis. Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR)
and western blot were used to validate and characterize candidate microRNAs and
their possible targets. These results were confirmed as well in ex vivo separated
preadipocytes and mature adipocytes from murine and human WAT depots. Results:
In the present study we identified a panel of new microRNAs not related to
adipogenesis so far. DHT stimulation decelerates the adipogenesis in both WAT
depots, although effects are stronger on EPI WAT differentiation. In line with this, in
both WAT depots the expression of most of the analyzed microRNAs decrease in
DHT stimulated cells, compared to control treated cell. Conclusion: We identified
new microRNAs whose expression is induced during adipogenesis and whose
expression extent differs between inguinal and epididymal WAT. These
microRNAs, as presumable regulators of adipogenesis, may serve as promising
targets for a fat depot directed treatment of obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP830
EP831
Level of fitness among overweight medical students in Uzbekistan
Khilola Gulyamova, Sitora Muminova & S.I. Ismailov
Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Actuality
According  to  the  World  Health  Organization,  the  escalating  international
epidemic of obesity is now the most significant contributor to ill health. More
than 30% of US adults are obese, i.e. body mass index (BMI) 30 kg/m2, and it is
feared that one in three children born in the early 21st century will develop
diabetes with a consequent reduction in lifetime expectancy. In Uzbekistan 20.2%
of population is obese.
Aims of study
Examine prevalence of overweight and obesity rate and fitness levels among
students of Tashkent Pediatric Medical Institute.
Materials and methods
We examined 104 medical students (24 males and 80 females) with mean age
23G1.6  and
22G1.9  years  old  respectively:  checked  their  BMI,  waist
circumference, blood pressure, and also performed fitness test with checking
heart rate before and after 20 squats. Heart rate increase percentage of less than 20
referred for excellent, 21-40 - good, 41-65 satisfactory, 66-75 poor, 76 and
above - very poor fitness levels.
Results
Fourteen percent of students were underweight (BMI less than 18 kg/m2), 66% of
students had normal weight (BMI 18-25 kg/m2), 17% overweight (25-29.9 kg/m2),
3% obese (over 30 kg/m2). 61% of students showed good, 32% had satisfactory,
3.5% poor and 3.5% very poor levels of physical activity. 20% of overweight
students were in very poor physical condition, while 25% of underweight students
showed satisfactory fitness level.
Conclusion
Obesity rate among students is 3%, but overall rate together with overweight is
20%. Among overweight students 20% were in very poor physical condition.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP831
EP832
Comparison of Framingham and REGICOR scales for calculating
cardiovascular risk in a cohort of patients with morbid obesity
Francisco Javier Vílchez-López, Isabel Mateo-Gavira, María Belén
Ojeda-Schuldt, Luis Escobar-Jiménez & Manuel Aguilar-Diosdado
Endocrinology, Puerta del Mar Hospital, Cádiz, Andalucía, Spain.
Introduction
The  prevalence  of  obesity  has  increased,  reaching  epidemic  proportions.
Framingham  and  REGICOR  scales  predict  the  likelihood  of  developing  a
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
coronary event in the next 10 years. The aim of this study was to assess the
concordance of these scales in the stratification of cardiovascular risk (CVR) in a
cohort of patients with morbid obesity.
Methods
We designed a cross-sectional study in a sample of patients with morbid obesity
evaluated from 2005 to 2012. The estimation of CVR at 10 years was determined
according to the Framingham-Wilson Score and its adaptation to Mediterranean
populations (REGICOR scale). These scales include the following variables: age,
sex, total cholesterol levels, HDL cholesterol, systolic blood pressure, presence of
diabetes (T2DM) and smoking. Depending on the results, they were classified into
3 categories: low risk (!10%), intermediate (10-20%) and high (O20%).
Results
A total of 211 patients were included. The mean age was 37.9G9.8 years and
157 were female (74%). The mean BMI was 51.13G7.11 kg/m2. Regarding
cardiovascular risk factors, 75 (35.7%) patients had hypertension, 75 (35.7%)
dyslipidemia, 62 (29.5%) smoking and 53 (25.2%) T2DM. Total cholesterol mean
levels were 197.27G38.85 mg/dl and HDL 44.19G11.53 mg/dl. The results for
the estimation of CVR with the REGICOR scale were: 93.9% of patients with low
risk, 5% intermediate and 1% high risk, while those with the Framingham score
were: 77.2% low risk, 13.9% intermediate and 8.9% high. The mean CVR
estimation was 3.08G2.85 with REGICOR versus 6.16G7.02% with Framing-
ham (P!0.001). The Kappa index of agreement between the scales was 0.231.
Conclusion
In our series, the CVR estimated by Frammigham score was superior to that
obtained by REGICOR scale. A positive correlation between both scales was
obtained but with a fair agreement. These results support the importance of CVR
scales adjusted for each population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP832
EP833
Lipodystrophia ın a pregnant women wıth unregulated glycemıa
Berçem Ayçiçek Do
˘ an, Tug˘ ba Arıkan & Emre Donmez
Derınce Traınıng and Educatıon Hospıtal, Kocaelı, Turkey.
Introduction
Many  endocrinopathies  such  as  acromegaly,  Cushing’s  syndrome
(CS),
pheomochromocytom  and  lipodystrophia  can  be  associated  with  insulin
resistance and unregulated diabetes mellitus (DM).
Case report
A 37 -year- and 2 months pregnant women admitted to our out patient clinic for
regulation of hyperglycemia. On physical examination; Blood Pressure: 140/95
mmHg, Body  Mass Index: 31 kg/m2, central  obesity, acanthosis  nigricans,
muscles in lower bilateral extremities were thinner than other body areas. Ectopic
fat accumulation (buffalo hump) and loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue were
detected. She has T2DM which is unregularly, from the beginning of the disease
and  dyslipidemia  and  hypertension  for
5
years.  She  have  not  taken  any
pharmaceutical agents which can deteriorate glucose metabolism. A lot of tests
related to CS were performed at several times. Fasting plasma glucose: 210 mg/dl,
HbA1C % 8.6, tryglycerid: 806 mg/dL, HDL-C: 41 mg/dl. Abdomen USG was
performed for the fetal assessment and fetal heart’s sound was not found. Then,
medical abortus was performed. The causes of unregulated DM were searched.
For the scan of CS, the venous sampling was obtained in the morning and 08.00
plasma cortisol: 17 mg/dl, ACTH 11 pg/ml, 24 hours urinary free cortisol level:
128 mcg (N:upper limit is: 74 mcg) and night salivary cortisol were normal.
Overnight 1 mg dexametazon supresyon test: 1.58 mg/dl and then CS was
excluded.  Acromegaly,  pheomochromocytoma,  and  thyroid  disorders  were
excluded by scan tests of blood and urinary samples. She diagnosed with
lypodystrophia because of specific physical feautures with metabolic abnormal-
ities. Performance of genetically analyses (LMNA, AGPAT-2, BSCLZ, LLNA,
ZMPSTE24, PPAR6) and further examination continued.
Conclusion
Like our patient, Lipodystrophia can manifests just a loss of subcutaneous adipose
tissue related to severe insulin resistance and unregulated DM.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP833
EP834
The level of SCD1 in subcutaneous adipose tissue is associated with the
presence of metabolic syndrome in morbidly obese patients
Sara Garcia-Serrano1,2, Carolina Gutierrez-Repiso1, Francisca Rodriguez-
Pacheco1, Ailec Ho-Plagaro1, Eva Garcia-Escobar1,2, Miguel A Alaminos-
Castillo1, Lourdes Garrido-Sanchez3,4, Sergio Valdes1,2,
Montserrat Gonzalo1, Alberto Rodriguez-Can˜ ete5, Custodia Montiel-
Casado5, Javier Moreno-Ruiz5 & Eduardo Garcia-Fuentes1,4
1Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Biomedical Research Institute
of Malaga (IBIMA), Regional University Hospital, Malaga, Spain;2CIBER
of Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Disorders (CIBERDEM), Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Malaga, Spain;3Department of Endocrinology and
Nutrition, Biomedical Research Institute of Malaga (IBIMA), Virgen de la
Victoria Hospital, Malaga, Spain;4CIBER Physiopathology of Obesity and
Nutrition (CIBERObn), Instituto Salud Carlos III, Malaga, Spain;
5Department of Surgery, Biomedical Research Institute of Malaga (IBIMA),
Regional University Hospital, Malaga, Spain.
Introduction
The stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) is an enzyme involved in the metabolism
of fatty acids, and seems to be involved in the regulation of atherosclerosis
development. In this study we want to check the expression of SCD1 in visceral
and subcutaneous adipose tissue and its relationship with the metabolic syndrome.
Methods
We measured SCD1 mRNA and protein expression in visceral and subcutaneous
adipose tissue from 25 morbidly obese patients. Patients were classified into two
groups based on whether or not to have metabolic syndrome (according to the IDF
2005 criteria).
Results
SCD1 mRNA expression in subcutaneous adipose tissue is significantly lower in
those subjects with metabolic syndrome (PZ0.036), while SCD1 protein is
significantly higher (PZ0.005). The subjects who meet the HDL or glucose
criteria are those with lower SCD1 mRNA expression and higher SCD1 protein
levels. In visceral adipose tissue, no association was found between SCD1 mRNA
or protein levels and metabolic syndrome.
Conclusions
The presence of metabolic syndrome in morbidly obese patients seems to be
associated with SCD1 levels in subcutaneous adipose tissue.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP834
EP835
Correlation between selected anthropometric, biochemical parameters
and CRP- reactive protein concentration among patients with
endocrine disorders
Agata Kulpok1, Justyna Nowak2,3, Karolina Kulik-Kupka2,3,
Anna Bronczyk-Puzon2,3, Aneta Koszowska2,3 & Barbara Zubelewicz-
Szkodzinska1,2,3
1Department of Endocrinology, Municipal Hospital in Piekary Slaskie,
Piekary Slaskie, Silesia, Poland;2Department of Nutrition Related
Prevention, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Bytom, Silesia,
Poland;3School of Public Health in Bytom, Medical University of Silesia,
Katowice, Bytom, Silesia, Poland.
Introduction
Anthropometric studies are one of the methods, by means of which it is possible to
assess patient’s nutritional status.
Aim
The aim of this study was to assess the relationship between the selected
anthropometric as well as biochemical parameters and CRP- reactive protein
concentration among patients with endocrine disorders.
Materials and methods
The  studied  group  involved  all  patients  hospitalized  at  the  Endocrinology
Department in the Piekary Medical Centre in Piekary 
´ le˛skie from 2nd January
2012 to 31st December 2012 who met the inclusion criteria - 299 subjects (264
women and 35 men). Anthropometric studies and body composition analysis were
carried out and results of biological parameters were analysed. The following
indices were measured: BMI, WHR, WHtR and biochemical tests as follows:
25(OH)D3,  CRP  and  lipid  profile.  The  study  was  retrospective  and  non-
interventional. aZ0.05.
Results
Overweight or obesity was observed among 63% group (NZ188) based of BMI
score. Deficiency or serious deficiency of vitamin D was observed among 84%
group. The mean concentration of 25(OH)D3 was 20.3G8.3 ng/ml; CRP reactive
protein 4.7G7.4 mg/l; total cholesterol 212.1G45.4 mg/dl; LDL cholesterol
124.9G42.4 mg/dl; HDL cholesterol 61.5G19.3 mg/dl; triglycerides 135.4G
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
76.3 mg/dl. 36% of patients were found to have high concentrations of CRP.
There were observed positive correlation between BMI and CRP-reactive protein
(RZ0.33; P!0.0001); WHtR and CRP-reactive protein (RZ0.38; P!0.0001);
WHR and CRP-reactive protein (RZ0.26; P!0.0001); percentage of body
fat and CRP-reactive protein (RZ0.26; P!0.001); waist circumference and
CRP-reactive protein (RZ0.26; P!0.0001).
Conclusions
Induction of inflammation was observed in all patients with abnormal body
weight. Inflammation intensity (determined on the basis of CRP-concentration)
was higher in overweight than obese patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP835
EP836
Retinol-binding protein 4 expression in subcutaneous neck adipose
tissue and serum in patients with and without metabolic syndrome
Vlatka Pandzic Jaksic, Ana Livun, Danijela Grizelj, Drago Boscic,
Marko Ajduk, Rajko Kusec & Ozren Jaksic
Dubravva University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia.
Retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4) is considered as an important mediator of
insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome (MS). In adipose tissue (AT)) it is
mainly secreted from visceral depots. The residual metabolic risk which remains
beyond that caused by visceral AT seems to be hold by upper body subcutaneous
AT. This large pathogenic depot might be representative by subcutaneous neck
AT.
The aim of this study was to examine and to compare RBP4 gene expressions in
paired superficial and deep subcutaneous neck AT. We also investigated their
associations with metabolic risk factors and serum RBP4.
Samples of both superficial and deep neck subcutaneous AT were taken in 38
patients during routine neck surgery. RBP4 gene expression was analysed by
RQ-PCR method. Serum was taken preoperatively to determine insulin, glucose,
triglycerides, HDL-cholesterol, C-reactive protein and RBP4. Anthropometric
measurements and bioelectric impedance analysis were also performed. Study
participants were divided in two groups - with and without MS according to
revised NCEP ATP III criteria.
RBP4 gene expressions in AT and serum level were not different between our
study groups. RBP4 gene expressions were significantly lower in superficial than
in deep AT in the group without MS. In patients with MS different RBP4 gene
expressions between layers of AT were not present. In the whole sample of
participants superficial RBP4 gene expression positively correlated with fat mass,
insulin and HOMA index. Serum RBP4 did not correlate with RBP4 gene
expressions, but it correlated with waist circumference, insulin, HOMA index and
triglycerides.
Our results indicate that superficial and deep neck subcutaneous AT might have a
different secretory profile. Superficial layers with metabolically more favourable
aspects are absent in subjects with MS suggesting that dysfunctional changes
occur in all layers of upper body subcutaneous AT and might contribute to insulin
resistance.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP836
EP837
Metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance: can they be predicted by
clinical indicators in obese prepubertal children?
Elpis Vlachopapadopoulou, Eirini Dikaiakou, Vasilis Petrou,
Elli Anagnostou, Feneli Karachaliou, Ioanna Patinioti, Aspasia Fotinou &
Stefanos Michalacos
Department of Endocrinology-Growth and Development, Children’s
Hospital P. & A. Kyriakou, Athens, Greece.
Aim
To evaluate whether anthropometric indices and acanthosis nigricans can be
useful markers for early detection of Insulin Resistance and Metabolic Syndrome
(MetS) in overweight and obese children.
Methods
Data from 510 prepubertal children (40% boys), 12.9% overweight and 87.1%
obese with mean age 9.7G2.5 years were analyzed. Logistic regression analysis
was used to investigate which factors were associated with HOMA-IR O3 and
metabolic syndrome.
Results
MetS was found in 12.9% of the children. HOMA-IR O3, was found in 14.3% of
overweight and 39.8% of obese children. Among children with MetS, 50% had
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
HOMA-IR O3 and they were all obese. The mean Body Mass Index (BMI) was
greater in children with HOMA-IR O3 (29.3G3.1 vs. 26.1G3.1, P!0.001)
(OR:1.31, 1.20-1.44). Also, children with HOMA-IR O3 had greater waist
circumference (meanGSD: 94.7G9.6 vs. 85.6G10.4, P!0.001). Acanthosis
Nigricans (ORZ2.42, 95% CI: 1.23 - 4.79, PZ0.011) and increased %fat (ORZ
1.14, 95% CI: 1.05 - 1.25, PZ0.003) were associated with greater likelihood for
HOMA-IR O3. Waist-to-height (WHtR) was associated with greater odds for
HOMA-IR  O3  (ORZ1.07,  95%  CI:  1.02-1.18,  PZ0.013).  Furthermore,
increased WHtR tended to be associated with the presence of MetS (ORZ1.07,
95% CI: 0.99 - 1.16, PZ0.100), while for one unit increase in BMI the likelihood
for MetS was found to increase about 16% (PZ0.001).
Conclusion
The severity of obesity as evidenced by BMI, the presence of waist circumference
to height ratio higher than 0.5, as well as the presence of Acanthosis Nigricans are
clinical indicators for increased metabolic risk.
Keywords: Acanthosis Nigricans, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP837
EP838
Association of sex hormones with metabolic syndrome among Egyptian
males
Maram Mahdy, Hussein Eloraby & Eman Zaky
Ain Shams University Hospitals, Cairo, Egypt.
Metabolic Syndrome (Met S), is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular
disease (CVD) and mortality, the presence of 1 or 2 components of the (MetS)
increases overall mortality compared with the absence of any component of the
(MetS). Epidemiological studies have shown that low testosterone is associated
with MetS. While testosterone levels decline with age, Estradiol (E2) levels
remain relatively stable resulting in a decreased testosterone: E2 ratio (T:E),
Whether theses hormonal pattern changes play a role in the development of Met S
should be further assessed.
Objective
To  study  the  relation  between  endogenous sex  hormones with  different
components of MetS.
Design
The study was conducted on 80 egyptian males divided into Gr 1: 40 males with
Met S and Gr 2:40 healthy males of matched age.
Results
Gr 1 had significant higher body mass index(BMI)(Gr 1:32.3G3.8, Gr2:28.4G4),
Waist  circumference
(WC)  (Gr1:110.5G7,  Gr2:100.7G6.4)  systolic  blood
pressure
(SBP) (Gr1:135.5G12.1, Gr2:117.3G3.6),  diastolic blood  pressure
(DBP)
(Gr1:94.3G10.6,  Gr2:74.9G3.4)  cholesterol
(Gr1:
275.4G32.2,
Gr2:155.7G29.9)  LDL
(Gr1:175.4G34.9,  Gr2:77.8G31.1)  TG(Gr1:301.6G
29.9,  Gr2:138.3G24.5)  Fasting  blood  sugar
(Gr1:111.1G6.9,Gr2:90.8G9.5)
Fasting  insulin
(Gr1:6.9G1.6,  Gr2:4.1G1.7)  HOMA-IR
(Gr1:1.89G0.48,
Gr2:0.93G0.39)  E2  (Gr1:20.3G4.3,  Gr2:14.6G5.6)  and  significantly  lower
HDL  (Gr1:39.6G7,  Gr2:50.2G4.8).Gr  1  had  significant  lower  testosterone
(2.1G0.64) than Gr2(3.27G0.58) lower T:E ratio (Gr1: 0.11G0.05, Gr2: 0.25G
0.09), and significant higher E2 (Gr1: 20.3G4.3, Gr2: 14.6G5.6) testosterone
was significantly inversely correlated with weight, BMI, WC cholesterol, LDL,
TG, FBS, Fasting insulin and HOMA-IR and positively correlated with HDL.E2
was significantly positively correlated with cholesterol, LDL, FBS, fasting insulin
and  HOMA-IR,  Cutoff value  for  E2 (O16.78) with sensitivity 92.5% and
specificity
82.5% and cutoff value for testosterone (!2.37) with sensitivity
67.5% and specificity 95%.
Conclusion
Patients  with  MetS  had  significant  lower  testosterone  and  T:E2
ratio  and
significant  higher  E2.Testosterone  and  E2
are  significantly  associated  with
various components of the MetS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP838
EP839
Bad eating habits among type II diabetic patients at tertiary hospital:
a case-control study
Ali Alwan1, Pouya Saeedi2, Hadeel Farhood3 & Ameer Alhusuny4
1College of Medicine, University of Babylon, Babylon, Iraq;2University of
Otago, Otago, New Zealand;3College of Medicine, University of Babylon,
Babylon, Iraq;4College of Medicine, University of Babylon, Babylon, Iraq.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Background
There is a strong association between type II diabetes mellitus (DM) and gaining
weight. Lifestyle modification is an important factor for weight management to
overcome the obesity as well as DM epidemics.
Aim of study
To find the differences of eating habits and Rosenberg Self-Esteem between DM
patients and control and to find the strongest contributor of risk factors by study
groups.
Methods
A hospital-based matched case-control study design was carried out on (250)
patients with DM and control seen at Diabetic and Endocrine Centre and other
outpatient clinics in Tertiary Teaching Hospital. A binary logistic regression
model was used and a P-value of % 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
There were significant mean differences of Bad Eating Habits by study groups
among all statements except (How many times did you sleep less than five hours
at night). There were significant mean differences of Rosenberg Self-Esteem by
study groups among for the statements (1, 3, 5, 8, 9 and 10). (35.2%) of DM
patients had high Bad Eating Habits and Rosenberg Self-Esteem levels. There
were direct weak significant correlations of Bad Eating Habits and Rosenberg
Self-Esteem Scales by DM patients (rZ0.286, PZ0.001*) and control (rZ0.314,
P!0.001*). DM patients were 0.91 and 0.86 less likely to report bad eating habits
and high Rosenberg Self-Esteem than control, respectively. DM patients were 19,
18 and 3 times more likely to have brothers and parent with DM than control as
well as to have high HBA1c, respectively.
Conclusion
Assessing eating behaviors of diabetic patients as a routine nutritional assessment
is  an  important  implication  in  patient’s  health.  Therefore,  considering  the
complex association between diabetes and its health related consequences, there
is a considerable need for educating diabetic patients.
Keywords: Bad Eating Habits, Type II Diabetes Mellitus, Rosenberg Self-Esteem
Scale, HBA1c, waist circumference
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP839
EP840
“The menstrual disorders in women with obesity in fertile age”
Akhmedova Shakhnoza & Sadikova Dildora
Tashkent Paediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
The aim
To examine menstrual disorders in women with obesity in fertile age.
Material and methods
We observed the reproductive health of 25 women with obesity and infertility
(1 st group). Second group of patients consisted from 25 healthy women without
obesity. The age of patients of 1 st group was from 20 to 39 years old, in average
28.3G0.64. The age of patients of 1 st group was from 22 to 37 years old, in
average 30.4G0.51/
To all patients have been conducted spectrum of investigations, which include
clinical,  biochemistry
- whole  blood  and  urine  analysis,  lipid  spectrum,
radioimmune hormonal analysis of the blood (prolactin, LH, FSH, insulin,
estradiolum,  testosterone,  progesterone,  free  thyroxin,  dehydroepyandrosten-
dione, 17 oxyprogesterone), antimuller hormone). Besides of this, electrocardio-
graphy, ultrasound investigation of uteri and ovarium during 11-14 days of
periods, and MRY of pituitary.
The results of the study
The investigation of hormonal profile of 1 st group showed that hormonal profile of
1 st group showed that average level of hormones in 14 day of periods was follow:
LH- 21.1G2.1 mME/l (average norm - 28.7 mME/l), FSH -4.7G0.5 mME/l
(average norma 22.1 mME/l), prolactin - 5.1G0.5 mmol/l (average norm is
5.7 mmol/l), free testosterone - 4.6 ng/ml (average norm ! 1.0 ng/ml). Then, in
1 group of patients were found more low data of average levels of LH, FSH, free
testosterone. The level of ACTH, TSH, free thyroxine and cortisol were normal.
Conclusions
We established, that in fertile age women with obesity in the basis if menstrual
dysfunction  take  place  hyperandrogenic  anovulation  on  the  condition  of
hyperinsulinemiya.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP840
EP841
“The ultrasound data of gonads in women with obesity in fertile age”
Sadikova Dildora & Akhmedova Shakhnoza
Department of Endocrinologyic Medical Institute, Department of Endo-
crinology, Tashkent Paediatric Medical Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
The aim
To examine the ultrasound data of gonads in women with obesity in fertile age.
Material and methods
We observed the reproductive health of 25 women with obesity and infertility
(1 st group). Second group of patients consisted from 25 healthy women without
obesity. The age of patients of 1 st group was from 20 to 39 years old, in average
28.3G0.64. The age of patients of 1 st group was from 22 to 37 years old, in
average 30.4G0.51/
In 1 st group women were distributed depend from body mass index (BMI) into
3 subgroups: with obesity of 1 st degree: (BMI Z28.0-30.9) — 7 (28%), with
obesity of 2 degree (BMI Z31.0-35.9) — 8 cases (32%), with 3 degree of obesity
(BMI Z36.0-40.9) — 10 women (40%).
In second group 23 (92%) women have normal BMI data (BMI Z20.0-25.9), and
2 patients (8%) — with deficits I of weight (BMI !18.5).
The results of the study
The results of folliculomeriya showed high frequency of cases of follicul’s
persistencia y 18 (30%), anovulation 14 (23.3%) and atresia of folliculis 12 (20%),
hypoovulatory syndrome - 8 (13.3%). The normal ovulatory period was found in
6 women  (10%).  Then,  ultrasound  investigation  is  noinvasive,  access  and
sensitive method of evaluation of menstrual cycle and process of ovulation in
women of fertile age with obesity.
Conclusions
We established, that in fertile age women with obesity in structure of disorders of
periods more frequently be found secondary amenorrhea - 8 (32.0%), follicul’s
persistencia y 18 (30%), anovulation 14 (23.3%) and atresia of folliculis 12 (20%).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP841
EP842
Using on-line program of good nutrition and right diet helps to fight
against obesity
Vadim Krylov & Evgeny Levine
I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
It is too much easier and cheaper to obesity, than in the future to treat diabetes
mellitus and its complications.
Materials and methods
We used an online system for patient education based on the video lessons, full of
humor, pictures, and cartoons to convey the necessary information on good
nutrition, necessary to do exercises and the need for exposure to the sun to our
patients.
Study results
Watching the short movies, the patients formed the habits of good nutrition during
the first month already, which includes a diet with restriction of fat, digestible
carbohydrates  and  daily  consumption  of  low-fat  dairy  products,  slow
carbohydrates, protein and fiber. Were also presented recommendations for
compliance with the physical activity, as well as vitamin D consumption.
A patient was in touch with a doctor-endocrinologist, if he has any additional
questions.
We examined data from a survey of 50 patients registered in the online system and
20 patients control group who were given the same recommendations on the
appointment.
Surprisingly, persistent decrease in body weight by an average of 5.5 kg over 6
months was demonstrated in all patients of the main group, the consumption of
milk and dairy products increased by 2.6 times, compared with patients in the
control group. The exposure to the sun was observed 15 to 30 minutes daily,
compared with the control group 5-10 minutes. Regular physical activity were the
main group of 260 minutes per week, in control group 80 minutes per week.
Conclusions
So, we need to improve the quality of information material, including using online
technologies to improve the quality and duration of life of our patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP842
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP843
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and obesity, what came first?
Cristina Serbanescu1, Alexandra Nila1, Anca Sirbu1,2 & Simona Fica1,2
1Elias University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;2University of
Medicine and Pharmacy ”Carol Davila”, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Morbidly obese patients raise many problems in therapeutic attitude, sometimes
associating  a  cluster  of  obesity-related  abnormalities:  hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, metabolic syndrome, respiratory insufficiency, and high risk for
cardiovascular disease. These afflictions can be reversed through weight loss,
especially in young patients.
Case presentation
We present the case of a 41 year old male patient, smoker, with morbid obesity
(BMI Z63 kg/m2), who came to our clinic for investigations regarding 90 kg
weight gain in the past 5 years, daytime sleepiness and sleep apnea observed by
the family. Clinical evaluation revealed mild hypertension, tachycardia, skin
hyperpigmentation, bilateral gynecomastia, and ochre dermatitis.
Paraclinical  tests  showed  isolated  hypogonadotropic  hypogonadism  with  a
testosterone level less than a quarter of the normal plasma value, testosterone Z
53.3 ng/dl (N: 330-805 ng/dl), FSH Z1.11 mIU/ml (0.1-12.4 mIU/ml), LH Z
3.69 mIU/ml (N: 0.1-8.6 mIU/ml), inflammatory syndrome, hypercholesterole-
mia, type 2 diabetes, normal renal and liver function. The patient had no prior
investigation of the pituitary-gonadal axis. Pulmonary function tests showed
moderate restrictive ventilatory disfunction, and after performing polysomno-
gram evaluation, he was diagnosed with severe sleep apnea syndrome and
obesity-hypoventilation syndrome. CPAP therapy was started, improving the
symptoms and diminishing daytime sleepiness. Pituitary imaging to further
evaluate the etiology of hypogonadism is required.
Conclusions
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in male obese patients can be caused by
visceral obesity, or can be a cause for obesity. Patients associating respiratory
distress limit the therapeutical options. Testosterone substitution therapy can
decrease oxygen saturation and worsen sleep apnea syndrome, leading to sleep
cardiac arrhythmia, but more studies are required in this field. The only viable
option is rapid weight loss, which can be achieved through bariatric surgery.
Keywords: Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, obesity, obesity-hypoventilation
syndrome, type 2 diabetes
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP843
EP844
The role of smoking in endothelial dysfunction in patients with obesity
Maria Lyndina & Alex Shishkin
Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia.
Introduction and aims
Numerous studies in recent years have confirmed the existence of a link between
endothelial dysfunction and vascular diseases, and lifestyle factors such as
obesity, sedentary lifestyle and smoking.
Methods
We examined 108 patients with obesity (90 women and 18 men, mean age
54.62G0.4 years). All patients underwent clinical and laboratory examination.
Vasomotor endothelial function was evaluated by reactive hyperemia using
ultrasonic device Aloka SSd-5500 located on the procedure Celermajer and
collaborators. According to the formula counts% increase in vessel diameter:
endothelium-dependent vasodilation (EDVD) Z((Diameter of the brachial artery
after reactive hyperemia - the diameter of the brachial artery source) / diameter of
the brachial artery source) ! 100%.
Results
The level of smoking patients EDVD significantly higher normal values - the
percentage of increase was 6.81G1.08%, while non-smokers - 12.28G1.08%.
Patients prone to smoking, level of MAU exceeded the normal value amounted to
26.3G8.22 g/l and in non-smokers - 17.64G1.25 mg/l. Homocysteine levels in
non-smokers was 11.47G0.74 mol/l, in smokers - 13.72G0.60 mkml/l.
Conclusions
Obese patients prone to smoking have a sign of endothelial dysfunction.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP844
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP844B
Effect of supplementation with chitosan on food intake, weight gain, and
cardiometabolic risk indices in Wistar rats fed normal diet ad libitum
Suhad Bahijri1,2, Lubna Alsheikh1,2, Ghada Ajabnoor1,2 & Anwar Borai3,2
1Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine- King
Abdulaziz University (KAU), Jeddah, Saudi Arabia;2Saudi Diabetes
Research Group - King Fahd Medical Research Center- KAU, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia;3King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud
bin Abdulaziz University for Health, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Introduction
Prevalence of obesity is increasing globally and in Saudi Arabia in particular.
Obesity is associated with increased risk of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases.
Therefore, studies to control obesity and its effect on health are important.
Chitosan  has  been  recommended  as  a  suitable  functional  supplement  for
controlling obesity; and consequently; its associated complications. However,
results were inconclusive.
Aim
To investigate the effect of chitosan supplement on food intake, weight gain,
glucose homeostasis,insulin resistance, lipid profile, and markers of obesity,
inflammation, and oxidative stress in Wistar rats fed normal diet ad libitum.
Animals and Methods
Two groups of three months old male Wistar rats were studied. Group A (Control,
nZ10), fed normal chow, and Group B (Test, nZ10), fed normal chow with 1%
w/w chitosan added. Food was allowed ad-libitum. At the start, then at end of 12
weeks of supplementation with chitosan, rats were weighed, and fasting blood
samples were drawn for measurement of glucose, lipid profile, insulin, leptin,
gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT), and tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-a).
Atherogenic index (AI), HDL:LDL cholesterol, and homeostatic model of insulin
resistance (HOMA-IR) were calculated.
Results
Chitosan significantly reduced means of total and LDL cholesterol, serum leptin,
triglycerides, and AI, and increased means of food intake, HDL: LDL cholesterol
in groups B, compared to group A (P!0.05 in all cases). However, there was no
significant difference in means of weight, GGT, or TNF-a between groups.
Conclusion
Chitosan increased appetite without additional weight gain, but had no effect on
markers of inflammation, and oxidative stress. However, it had beneficial effects
on lipids profile, hence may be a good option to reduce risk of diabetes and
cardiovascular disease (CVD). More work with dietary control,,measurement of
excreted fat, and fecal microbiota might elucidate its action and effect further.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP844B
Paediatric endocrinology
EP845
Safety and tolerability of once-weekly administration of CTP-modified
human growth hormone (MOD-4023): phase 2 study in children with
growth hormone deficiency
Nataliya Zelinska1, Violeta Iotova2, Julia Skorodok3, Oleg Malievsky4,
Ron G. Rosenfeld5, Zvi Zadik6, Ronit Koren7, Leanne Amitzi7,
Oren Hershkovitz7, Gili Hart7 & Klaudziya Radziuk8
1Ukrainian Children Specialized Clinical Hospital, Kyev, Ukraine;
2UMHAT, Varna, Bulgaria;3St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical
Academy, St. Petersburg, Russia;4Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa,
Russia;5Oregon Health & Science University, Oregon, USA;6Kaplan
Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel;7OPKO Biologics, Nes Ziona, Israel;
82nd Children City Clinic, Minsk, Belarus.
Objective
Growth hormone (GH) replacement therapy currently requires daily injections.
This may cause poor compliance, inconvenience and distress for patients. CTP-
modified  human  GH
(MOD-4023)  has  been  developed  for  once-weekly
administration in growth hormone-deficient (GHD) adults and children. In the
present Phase 2 study, the safety and tolerability of once-weekly subcutaneous
(SC) administration of MOD-4023 were evaluated in GHD children.
Design and methods
Randomized,  controlled  Phase
2 study  conducted  in
53  pre-pubertal  GHD
children receiving SC injections of one of three MOD-4023 doses once-weekly
(0.25, 0.48, and 0.66 mg/kg/week) or daily hGH (34 mg/kg/day) as control arm for
12 months. Safety assessments included monitoring of adverse events, injection
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
site  reactions,  vital  signs  and  physical  condition,  as  well  as  laboratory
assessments, such as glucose and lipid metabolism, blood biochemistry and
immunogenicity.
Results
The analysis included safety data for all 53 patients that completed 12 months of
treatment with either MOD-4023 (nZ42 patients) or hGH (nZ11). No severe
adverse events (AEs) were reported during treatment with MOD-4023. Twenty-
eight patients (66.7%) reported 101 AEs during treatment with MOD-4023. This
rate was similar to that observed for the daily arm, in which 8 patients (72.7%)
reported a total of 30 AEs. No evidence was found of injection site-related AEs
such  as  local  discomfort,  swelling,  erythema  or  lipoatrophy.  Laboratory
assessments supported the tolerability of MOD-4023 treatment, and no significant
overall changes were observed in glucose levels, insulin, HbA1c, or vital signs.
No anti-CTP Abs were detected and no neutralizing activity was observed.
Conclusions
MOD-4023 demonstrated an excellent safety and tolerability profile during
treatment for up to 12 months using a dose ranging from 0.25 to 0.66 mg/kg/week,
with no unexpected AEs considered to be related to MOD-4023. These results
support the continued clinical development of once-weekly MOD-4023 for the
treatment of children suffering from GHD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP845
EP846
Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic modeling of long acting
human growth hormone (MOD-4023) in growth hormone deficient
children
Dennis M. Fisher1, Michal Jaron-Mendelson2, Leanne Amitzi2,
Ronit Koren2 & Gili Hart2
1P Less Than, San Francisco, USA;2OPKO Biologics, Nes Ziona, Israel.
Introduction
OPKO Biologics has produced a long-acting human growth hormone (hGH),
MOD-4023, containing three copies of a naturally-occurring peptide (C-terminal
peptide, CTP) that markedly increases growth hormone’s in vivo residence. We
describe  the  development  and  validation  of  a  pharmacokinetic
(PK)  and
pharmacodynamic (PD) model to characterize the relationship between MOD-
4023 dose, serum concentrations (Cserum), and IGF-1 responses in healthy
adults, GHD adults, and GHD children.
Design/Methods
MOD-4023 PK and PD were studied following its administration to healthy adults
(NZ18), GHD adults (NZ46), and GHD children (age 3-11, NZ42). In children,
doses  were
0.25,
0.48,  or
0.66 mg/kg  weekly;  Genotropinw  hGH  (NZ11,
34 mg/kg daily) was the comparator. Data from healthy adults were used to
develop PK/PD models; models were then applied to GHD adults and children.
Serum concentrations were fit to a linear compartmental model with first-order
absorption and an absorption lag. An indirect response PD model (1) (in which
MOD 4023 increases input to IGF-1’s central compartment) was applied to serum
IGF-1 data. Covariates (age, body size, gender, organ function) were entered into
the PK/PD models if justified statistically. Analyses were performed using mixed-
effects (population) methods.
Results
In adults and children, a two-compartment PK model fit Cserum well. The
indirect response model generally fit IGF-1 well. In children, systemic parameters
scaled allometrically; baseline IGF-1 increased with age. The MOD-4023 PK/PD
models predict the relationship between administered dose, Cserum, and IGF-1
response with various dosing regimens.
Conclusion
A linear  PK  model  with  first-order  absorption  fit  concentration  data  well.
Systemic PK parameters varied with body size. The indirect response model
generally fit IGF-1 data in GHD children. Based on the analysis, the model can
assist in safety monitoring, and guide dose modifications. This model may be used
to support dose selection and dose modification in future clinical studies.
Reference: 1. Sun et al. JPET 289:1523-1532, 1999
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP846
EP847
The structure of genetically determined types of short stature in
Uzbekistan according to retrospective analysis
Nilufar Ibragimova, Dilbar Dalimova & Malika Mirkhaidarova
Laboratory of genomics under the Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of
Republic of Uzbekistan Academy of Sciences, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
Goal
To carry out a retrospective analysis of case histories of children and adolescents
with genetically determined types of short stature who admitted a paediatric
department of a clinic of Research Institute of Endocrinologyduring 2003-2013.
Materials and methods
An analysis of case histories of children and adolescents with short stature 3 to 17
years who undertook inpatient treatment in paediatric department of RIE clinic
during 2003-2013 is carried out.
Results
During 2003-2013, 642 children and adolescents with stunting and disorders of
sexual development (236 boys or 36.8% and 406 girls or 63.2%) were hospitalised
and examined; of them there were 197 children at the age of 3-11 years (30%) and
455 adolescents aged 12-17 years (70%). Mean age of patients at diagnostics
makes 12.7G3.9 years. The following structure of genetically determined types
of short stature is found: TS -57.1% (average age 13.8G3.5 years); with multiple
deficiency of adenohypophysis hormones (MDAH) - 23%; the ratio between boys
and girls made 1.5:1; primordial dwarfism in 5.2%; hypochondroplasia in 4.6%;
Noonan syndrome in 3.2%; Sekkel syndrome in 2.4%, Rassel-Silver syndrome in
2.1%; PraderWilli syndrome in 1.5%; Laron syndrome in 0.9%.
Conclusions
Results of the retrospective analysis show:
In Uzbekistan the greatest percent of children and adolescents with genetically
determined types of short stature is made by patients about TS and MDAH, in
comparison with other genetic variants of short stature;
- Late diagnostics and a low level of detectability of children with genetically
determined types of short stature in the Republic.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP847
EP848
Pediatric case of atypical course of DIDMOAD (Wolfram) syndrome in
Armenia
Gayane Bayburdyan, Lusine Arakelyan & Yelena Aghajanova
Yerevan State Medical University, Yerevan, Armenia.
Introduction
Wolfram Syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive progressive neurodegenerative
disorder with estimated prevalence of 1 in 500,000 r, also known as DIDMOAD
syndrome for its four most common features (Diabetes Insipidus, Diabetes
Mellitus, Optic Atrophy and Deafness). Patients present with nonautoimmune and
non-HLA linked diabetes mellitus associated with optic atrophy in the first
decade, diabetes insipidus and sensorineural deafness in the second decade, renal
tract  abnormalities  early  in  the  third  decade  and  multiple  neurological
abnormalities, like cerebellar ataxia, myoclonus, and psychiatric illness early in
the fourth decade.
Case report
An  8  years  old  boy  was  diagnosed  with  type  1  diabetes  with  ketosis  on
presentation and treated with insulin. However, upon diabetes compensation
polydipsia and polyuria continued and the following week diabetes insipidus was
diagnosed. MRI of the brain was only significant for posteriorarachnoid cyst
1.5!2.5!1.7 cm  between  the  cerebellar  hemispheres.  Genetic  analysis  for
Wolfram syndrome was not available at that time, therefore patient underwent
annual optic nerve funduscopy, audiometry and ultrasound of the urinary tract.
After 5 years, he developed hearing loss and early signs of macular atrophy, as
well as ureteral dilation. Finally, genetic analysis was abroad and WFS1 gene
mutation was identified.
Conclusion
Taking  into  account  that  in  some  countries  genetic  analysis  for  Wolfran
Syndrome may not be readily available, annual survey for all the components of
the syndrome is recommended. This is especially important in atypical and fast
progressing cases of Wolfram syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP848
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP849
Evaluation of creatine kinase levels during growth hormone
treatment
Asan Onder, Fatma Budak & Zehra Aycan
Dr. Sami Ulus Gynecology and Obstetrics, Children Health and Diseases
Training and Research Hospital, Pediatric Endocrinology Clinic, Ankara,
Turkey.
Objective
To investigate the changes in serum creatine kinase (CK) levels during the
treatment of patients with growth hormone (GH).
Methods
We evaluated 715 cases who were treated with GH retrospectively. The clinical
data of 20 children with severe CK elevation (O500 IU/L) were analyzed.
Results
CK elevation was recorded in 96 of the cases (13.5%) during GH theraphy. 20 of
these patients had severe CK elevation. The mean age of the cases with severe CK
elevation was 11.5G3.4 years and mean serum CK level was 828.9G400.1
(504-2246) U/L. The time elapsed between the beginning of treatment and CK
increase was 20.5G12.8 (3-48) months. 8 of the cases used GH formulations
containing m-cresol. We found no significant differences in CK levels according
to age, gender, height, growth velocity, diagnosis, lenght of the needle used and
GH preparations.
Conclusion
Severe CK elevation was found in 2% of the patients on GH treatment. The effects
of GH on muscle should be evaluated during follow up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP849
EP850
Methylphenidate and central precocious puberty
Ayça Torel Ergur
Kırıkkale University, Kırıkkale, Turkey.
Aims
Attention  Deficit  Disorder  &  Hyperactivity  Syndrome
(ADHD)  is  identify
attention deficit,impulsivity hyperactivity before the age of seven years old.
ADHD is a serious disease which could cause corruption of daily lifetime and
needed to be taken psychostimulant drugs. This case brings on that these kind of
drugs can have unexplored side effects. In this study; it was reported 7 precocious
puberty (PP) cases which used methylphenidate due to ADHD and investigated
interrelation between methylphenidate and precocious puberty.
Methods
This study consisted 7 cases which used methylphenidate due to ADHD. All the
cases with various pubertal complaints were admitted for family history, a detail
physical examination, pubertal staging and anthropometric evaluations. Puberty
precocious (PP) was diagnosed on the appearance of breast development before
the age of 8 years in girls and testes enlargement before 9 years in boys. The initial
evaluation of cases with PP included determinations of height, weight, pubertal
stage, bone age, pelvic ultrasound, neuroradiological imaging and evaluation of
the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis by measuring basal and GnRH stimulated
LH and FSH peaks, and the plasma concentration of estradiol. Patients were
followed for at least 6 months after diagnosis was made.
Results
The study group consisted 7 precocious puberty (PP) cases (4 girls, 3 boys; the
mean age 10.7G2.9 years old) with ADHD. Breast development in 4 girls and
testis enlargement in
3 boy cases were determined.. Basal hormonal levels
(thyroid-surrenal-prolactin) were normal range. Results of LHRH stimulation
tests in all the cases were demonstrated central pubertal responses. Radiologic
evaluations of hypotalomohypophisial region were normal in all the cases. One of
the cases which developed pubertal progression in follow-up was started on
GnRH analoque theraphy.
Conclusion
Glutamine,  dopamine  and  noradrenaline  are  most  important  excitatory
neurotransmitters that have a role in the starting of puberty. Depending on the
effect of methylphenidate cumulating of dopamine and noradrenaline in the
synaps gap could cause inducing puberty by effecting its own receptor. As a
result; using psychostimulant drugs at childhood may accelerate puberty.
Keywords  Attention  Deficit  Disorder  and  Hyperactivity  Syndrome  Methyl-
phenidate Central
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP850
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP851
Prepubertal IGF-1 and physical features among egyptians with recently
diagnosed type 1 diabetes
Ahmed Mohamed Bahaa El-Din, Alyaa Ahmed El-Sherbeny & Mohammad
Saad Hamed
Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction
T1DM is caused by immune mediated destruction of pancreatic b-cells, leading to
partial, or absolute insulin deficiency.The most frequent age of onset is 12 years.
IGF-1 is a polypeptide with 70 amino acids and its chemical structure is similar to
insulin. IGF-1 is associated with early development and has anabolic effect in
adults.  IGF-1
regulates  many  physiological  functions,  including  glucose
metabolism, cell survival and proliferation.
Objectives
To compare IGF-1 levels in type-1 diabetic children with that of healthy controls
and to find relationship between IGF-1 and physical features in T1DM
Patients and Methods
This study involved 85 children less than 12 years old.Seventy Patients with
T1DM selected according to ADA 2014 criteria for diagnosis of diabetes from
pediatric diabetes clinic at Ain Shams University hospital divided into 2 groups
based on duration of diabetes to T1DMO1 year duration and T1DM!1 year
duration. fifteen normal children attending the pediatric general clinics as a
control group. height, weight, arm span, upper body segment, lower  body
segment, body mass index, parents height beside Fasting blood glucose, HbA1C,
IGF-1, FSH, LH were assessed.
Results
Height percentile significantly higher in T1DM O 1year group median 50 (10 to
75) than T1DM ! 1 year (median 10 (3 to 44) P-value 0.007). IGF-1 level in group
T1DM O 1 year median 90 (70 to 110) (ng/ml) was significantly lower than other
groups (P-value 0.0008). IGF1 has a significant positive relation with Aram span
in group T1DM! 1year (P-value 0.024), positive significant relationship between
mother height and IGF-1 level in group T1DMO 1 year (P-value 0.013).
Conclusion
IGF-1 level is reduced in recent onset T1DM but still can have some effect on
somatic features even in the pressence of longstanding diabetes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP851
EP852
Puberty spectrum in neurofibromatosis - case reports
Corina Chirita1, Camelia Procopiuc2, Iuliana Gherlan2,5,
Andra Caragheorgheopol2, Monica Dragomir4,5, Diana Barca3,5 &
Cristina Dumitrescu2
1Medicover SRL, Bucharest, Romania;2National Institute of Endocrinology
C.I. Parhon, Bucharest, Romania;3Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry Prof.
Dr. A. Obregia, Bucharest, Romania;4Oncologycal Institute Prof. Dr. Alex
Treistoreanu, Bucharest, Romania;5University of Medicine and Farm-
acology Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania.
Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) is a rare disease determined by mutations in the RAS-
MAPK pathway. It can cause precocious or delayed puberty.
Case 1
A 11 years 9 months old girl known with Neurofibromatosis - Noonan Syndrome
(NF-NS) was admitted for severe growth deficit (-5.14 SDS). She had over 20 café
au lait spots, hypertelorism, pterigium colli, B1 P1. At 18 months she had had
surgery for pulmonary stenosis and after that a left ventricular tumor proved to be
neurofibroma at biopsy. She had low IGF1, normal thyroid function and empty
sella on MRI. Her bone age was 8. hGH therapy was started with satisfactory
results. After 2 years, at a bone age of 13 she showed no signs of puberty. A
triptorelinum test was negative. She was diagnosed with delayed puberty and
estrogen was started with good results.
Case 2
A 5yearsoldboywasadmittedforpubertalevaluation.The clinicalexamshoweda
tall child (C2.79 SDs) with café au lait spots and subcutaneous neurofibromas. He
was G4 P2 with a 25 ml testicular volume. A triptorelinum test confirmed central
precocious  puberty.  Bone  age  was
10.  The  cerebral  MRI showed  multiple
neurofibromas and a hamartoma in the third ventricle. He was diagnosed with
NF1 and central precocious puberty. Treatment with triptorelinum was started. At 7
years he presented a seizure and a MRI showed an infiltrative tumor in the right
thalamus. The biopsy showed a pilocytic astrocytoma. Radiotherapy and
chemotherapy were started and continued for 18 months with monthly iv treatment.
The evolution was favorable and a MRI after the completion of treatment showed no
residual tumor. At the age of 9.6 years treatment with triptorelinum was stopped and
puberty resumed. He was 1.65 DSD with a bone age of 13.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Conclusions
NF1 can cause all types of pubertal abnormalities and patients should be monitored
closely.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP852
Pituitary - Basic
EP853
Human non-functioning pituitary tumors invasiveness: inhibitory
effects of dopamine receptor type 2 (DRD2) agonist and cofilin
involvement
Erika Peverelli1, Elena Giardino1, Donatella Treppiedi1, Marco Locatelli2,
Valentina Vaira3,4, Stefano Ferrero3,5, Anna Spada1 &
Giovanna Mantovani1
1Endocrine Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico; Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy;2Neurosurgery Unit, Fondazione IRCCS
Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy;3Division of
Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda-Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milan, Italy;4Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare “Romeo ed Enrica
Invernizzi” (INGM), Milan, Italy;5Department of Biomedical, Surgical and
Dental Sciences, University of Milan Medical School, Milan, Italy.
Non-functioning pituitary tumors (NFPTs), although benign in nature, frequently
present local invasiveness that strongly reduces neurosurgery success. Medical
therapy is still under debate, although dopamine (DA) receptor 2 (DRD2) agonists
may induce tumor shrinkage in some patients. Aims of this study were: 1) to
evaluate the effect of DR2D agonist BIM53097 on migration and invasion of
NFPT cells, 2) to investigate the molecular mechanisms regulating the motility of
these cells, focusing on the role of cofilin, an actin severing protein involved in
actin remodelling required for migration, 3) to test cofilin expression and its
phosphorylation levels in NFPT tissues characterized or not by invasion of the
cavernous sinus.
Our data demonstrated that BIM53097 significantly reduced migration (-42G6%
P!0.05) and invasion (-32G2%, P!0.01) and increased about 4-fold cofilin
phosphorylation at Ser3 in cultured cells derived from human surgically removed
NFPTs, these data being replicated in HP75 cell line. Both these effects were
completely abolished by an inhibitor of ROCK, a Rho-associated kinase involved
in cofilin phosphorylation. The overexpression of wild type or phospho-deficient
(S3A) cofilin in HP75 cells increased cell migration (C49G6% and C57G9%
vs empty vector, respectively, P!0.05), suggesting a causal role for active
(dephosphorylated) cofilin in cell motility.
Interestingly, we observed that most invasive tumors showed nearly absent
P-cofilin, in contrast to high levels of P-cofilin showed by most non-invasive
tumors by both immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis (0.008 and 0.524
median P-cofilin/tot-cofilin ratio, respectively, P!0.05).
In conclusion, our data demonstrated that DRD2 agonist reduces NFPT cells
migration and invasion through a molecular mechanism that involves ROCK-
dependent phosphorylation of cofilin. Moreover, NFPT invasion of the cavernous
sinus associates with increased active (dephosphorylated) cofilin, suggesting that
cofilin phosphorylation status might be a novel molecular marker of the invasive
behaviour of NFPTs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP853
EP854
AIP inactivation leads to pituitary enlargement in the Zebrafish embryo
model
Marko Stojanovic1,2, Elena Daniela Aflorei3, Imelda McGonnell4 &
Márta Korbonits3
1Department for Neuroendocrinology, Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes
and Metabolic Diseases, Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia;
2University of Belgrade, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia;3Depart-
ment of Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK;4Department of Comparative
Biomedical Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, University of London,
London, UK.
Introduction
Patients with aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene mutations
are predisposed to large, invasive, GH- or PRL-secreting pituitary tumours,
occurring at a younger age and poorly responsive to treatment. The zebrafish (ZF)
model provides anatomical and functional similarities to human neuroendocrine
system.
Methods
AIP knock down (KD) ZF embryos were generated using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides injected at one-cell stage. Control embryos were injected with
5-base mispaired oligonucleotide as control morpholinos (CM). Wild type (WT)
embryos from the same batch served as uninjected controls. All embryos were
incubated in the same conditions for 5 days, and observed during development. At
120 hours post fertilization (hpf) whole mount immunostaining of all embryos
was performed with anti-PRL antibodies (rabbit anti-salmon polyclonal 1:2000).
A total of 15 embryos (5 from each group) were randomly selected for digital
microscopy. Pituitary staining was assessed by image analysis software (NIH
ImageJ 1.48v).
Results
Overall developmental delay and retardation was observed in the AIP KD
compared to WT and CM control groups. KD embryos exhibited reduced total
body length, transitory midbrain enlargement, pericardium enlargement and swim
bladder under-development. Assessed by the PRL staining, pituitary in the AIP
morphants appeared to be larger, ventrally shifted and round shaped compared to
oval or kidney shaped pituitary in the WT. Pituitary size in AIP morphants
(1621.9G87.2 mm2) was significantly larger then in WT (574.1G357.8 mm2
PZ0.04) and CM (626.0G223.6 mm2  PZ0.02) with no statistical difference
between the two control groups (PZ0.90).
Conclusion
AIP Morpholino Knock Down zebrafish embryos demonstrate brain, pericardium,
and swim bladder anomalies and general developmental delay, pointing to wide
developmental role of AIP gene. AIP morphant embryos exhibit larger surface of
PRL immunostaining in the pituitary compared to controls suggesting possible
increase in proliferative activity (hyperplasia or tumour) at pituitary level in the
absence of AIP gene function.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP854
EP855
Biguanides: A new potential therapeutic option for pituitary tumors?
Ma Carmen Vázquez-Borrego1,2, Alejandro Ibán˜ ez-Costa1,2, Eva Venegas-
Moreno3, Ma Ángeles Gálvez4, Alfonso Soto-Moreno3, Justo P. Casta
˜o1,2
& Raúl M. Luque1,2
1Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of
Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain;2Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía (HURS);
Instituto Maimónides de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC),
Córdoba, Spain;3Metabolism and Nutrition Unit, Hospital Virgen del
Rocío; Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS), Sevilla, Spain;4Service
of Endocrinology and Nutrition, HURS/IMIBIC, Córdoba, Spain.
Pituitary adenomas (PA) comprise a commonly underestimated pathology in
terms of incidence and associated morbimortality. Somatostatin and dopamine
analogs constitute the main medical treatment for PA. However, an appreciable
subset of patients are resistant or poorly responsive to these drugs, and hence, the
search for new therapies to control tumor growth and/or hormone secretion is
crucial. Biguanides such as metformin (MF; commonly used to treat type-2
diabetes),  phenformin
(PF)  and  buformin
(BF)  have  been  shown  to  exert
antitumor actions in different tumor types, but their actions in PA cells have not
been reported. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of these
biguanides on key functional parameters (i.e. cell viability, hormone secretion,
calcium signaling) in human PA cell cultures: 7 corticotropinomas (ACTHomas),
5 somatotropinomas (GHomas), and 3 non-functioning PA (NFPAs). Expression
profile of somatostatin
(ssts) and dopamine receptors (DRs) showed typical
receptor profiles for each pathologies (ACTHomas: sst5Osst2Osst1; GHomas:
sst5Rsst2; NFPAs: sst3Rsst2; and DR2 was the most abundant DR in all these
PAs). Interestingly, MF moderately, albeit consistently reduced cell viability in
PA cells, while treatment with PF and BF reduced cell viability more noticeably,
with the effect of PF very particularly intense in ACTHomas. These effects might
involve a calcium-dependent mechanism, since treatment with these biguanides
clearly altered the kinetics of cytosolic free calcium. Finally, MF and BF showed
a non-significant trend to reduce ACTH secretion in corticotropinomas, whereas,
in  primary  pituitary  cell  culture  of  two  primate  species,  MF  significantly
decreased ACTH and GH release. Taken together, our results reveal a clear
inhibitory effect of biguanides on PA cell viability in vitro, and given their
demonstrated  clinical  safety  suggest  a  potential  therapeutic  role  of  these
compounds for the treatment of patients PAs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP855
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP856
Selection and validation of reliable reference genes for RT-qPCR
analysis in a large cohort of pituitary adenomas
Kjersti R Normann1,2, Kristin Astrid Berland Øystese1,2, Jens Petter Berg2,3,
Jens Bollerslev1,2 & Nicoleta Cristina Olarescu1
1Section of Specialized Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway;3Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
Background
Real-time reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) has become the
method of choice for quantification of gene expression changes. Inappropriate
data  normalization  and  inconsistent  data  analyses  are  some  limitations  of
RT-qPCR. Pituitary adenomas are frequent tumours and the interpretation of
increasingly published data within this field is hindered by the lack of a proper
selection and validation of stably expressed reference genes.
Aim
To find and validate the optimal reference gene or combination for reliable
RT-qPCR  gene  expression  in  both  non-functioning
(NFPA)  and  hormone
secreting (ACTH and GH) pituitary adenomas.
Material and methods
Thirty commonly used reference genes (PCR array reference gene panel, BioRad,
Hercules, CA) were quantified by RT-qPCR in 24 pituitary adenomas (12 NFPA,
8 GH and 4  ACTH).  Data  were  analyzed using  three programs: GeNorm
(QbaseC), Normfinder and BestKeeper having different algorithms to identify
the most stable reference gene/combination of reference genes. The top candidate
genes were validated in a larger cohort of adenomas (144 NFPA, 63 GH and
19 ACTH).
Results
In all adenomas, ALAS1 and PSMC4 were the most stable reference genes as
estimated by GeNorm and Normfinder, whereas Bestkeeper ranked RPL30 and
RPS17 as the two most stable genes out of 10 carefully selected genes. The best
gene combination was ALAS1 and PSMC4 (GeNorm) or PSMC4 and GAPDH
(Normfinder). The validation experiment (GeNorm) showed that ALAS1 and
PSMC4 in NFPA and PSMC4 and GAPDH in hormone secreting adenomas were
the most stable gene combination. The best ranked reference genes were not
identical in different subgroups of adenomas.
Conclusions
Differences in stability between top-ranked genes in the reference gene selection
programs were minor. PSMC4, ALAS1 and GAPDH were stably expressed in
pituitary adenomas and a combination of two of them will serve as the most robust
choice of reference genes.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP856
EP857
Combined clinical and gene expression profiling in human ACTH-
secreting pituitary tumors
Maria Francesca Cassarino1, Andrea Cassarino1, Mariarosa Terreni3,
Alberto Giacinto Ambrogio1, Davide Gentilini2, Marco Losa4,
Francesco Cavagnini1 & Francesca Pecori Giraldi2,1
1Neuroendocrinology Research Laboratory, Istituto Auxologico Italiano
IRCCS, Cusano Milanino, Italy;2Molecular Biology Laboratory, Istituto
Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Cusano Milanino, Italy;3Department
Pathology, Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy;4Department Neurosurgery,
Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy;5Department Clinical Sciences &
Community Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
Introduction
We have previously reported on the considerable variability in ACTH-secreting
pituitary adenomas in terms of responses to major modulators in vitro (Pecori
Giraldi et al J. Neuroendocrinol. 2011). Further studies revealed also differences
in gene expression profiles in specimens analyzed by microarray analysis. Aim of
this study is to correlate transcriptome expression pattern in archival human
ACTH-secreting adenomas with clinical features of patients prior to and after
surgery.
Methods
Forty  human  ACTH-secreting  pituitary  adenoma  formalin-fixed  paraffin-
embedded specimens were cut into 20 mm thick sections and RNA extracted
using Recover All Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA,
USA). RNA (300 ng) was hybridized to Human HT-12V4 expression bead Chip
(approx 29000 transcripts) and analyzed with WG-DASL-HT assay (Illumina,
San Diego CA, USA). Patients’ clinical charts were reviewed and data analyzed
by Principal Component Analysis (JMP, Statistical Discovery, SAS Institute,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Cary NC, USA). Combined clinical and expression analysis was perfomed on
R-studio and functionality of identified genes assessed by DAVID and Cytoscape.
Results
Clinical and expression data clustered in three major groups, with 18, 4 and 18
patients, respectively. 1259 genes were significantly expressed (P!0.001) and
clinical variables which proved predictive of clustering were adenoma size and
plasma ACTH concentrations. Differential expression analysis among clusters
revealed up- and downregulation of several hundred genes which could be
annotated  to  functions  including  granule  lumen
(enrichment  score
2.6),
phosphorylation (enrichment score 2.07), aminoacid ligase (enrichment score
2.08) and ubiquitin pathway (enrichment score 1.8).
Conclusion
Combined clinical and gene expression analysis of human ACTH-secreting
adenomas allowed the identification of three major clusters. Functional annotations
revealed the involvement of distinct pathways in individual clusters, paving the
way to a greater understanding of the variability of human corticotrope tumors.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP857
EP858
Temozolomide has no direct effect on the normal and pathological
hormone production in the anterior pituitary and in pituitary tumors
Daniela Korthower1, Jose Monteserin-Garcia1, Yonghe Wu2,
Johanna Stalla1, Michael Buchfelder3, Walter Rachinger4, Gunter K. Stalla1
& Ulrich Renner1
1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Clinical Neuroendocrinology, Munich,
Germany;2German Cancer Research Center, Molecular Genetics, Heidel-
berg, Germany;3University of Erlangen-Nuremburg, Department of
Neurosurgery, Erlangen, Germany;4University of Munich, Department of
Neurosurgery, Munich, Germany.
The chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide (TMZ) has been applied for the
treatment of pituitary carcinomas, atypical pituitary adenomas and prolactinomas
resistant  to  dopamine  agonist  treatment  with  considerable  success.  Both
shrinkage of the tumors and a drop of excessive hormone production were
observed in TMZ-responsive patients. In order to clarify whether the TMZ-
induced suppression of hormone secretion was a consequence of tumor shrinkage
or caused by direct effects on hormone production we comparatively studied the
effect of TMZ on growth and hormone production in the ACTH-releasing AtT20
and in the GH/PRL-secreting GH3 cell lines, in a series of primary cell cultures of
human endocrine-active pituitary adenomas and in cell cultures of normal rat
pituitaries. In the rapidly growing AtT20 and GH3 cell lines TMZ treatment
reduced both cell numbers and hormone secretion but had no effect on hormone
production per cell demonstrating that the reduction of hormone secretion was a
consequence of the inhibition of growth of these cells. In 11 hormone-secreting
pituitary adenomas (5 somatotroph, 1 lactosomatotroph, 2 lactotroph, 2 cortico-
troph and 1 thyrotroph tumor), in which no or very little effects of TMZ on growth
were  observed,  TMZ  did  not  alter  GH,  PRL,  ACTH  and  TSH  secretion,
respectively. Neither basal nor releasing-hormone stimulated secretion of ACTH
and GH as well as basal or bromocriptine-suppressed PRL secretion was affected
in rat pituitary cell cultures by TMZ. In conclusion, TMZ had no direct effect
on hormone secretion in normal pituitary and pituitary tumors indicating that
TMZ-induced  suppression  of  hormone  levels  in  patients  with  pituitary
carcinomas may have been a consequence of tumor shrinkage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP858
EP859
A C-terminal inhibitor of HSP90 decreases GH-promoter activity and
growth hormone secretion in a cellular model of somatotrophinomas
Denis Ciato1,2, Daniela Regazzo2, Gianluca Occhi2, Carla Scaroni2,
Gunter Stalla1 & Marcelo Paez-Pereda1
1Max Planck Insitute of Pysichiatry, Munich; Germany;2University of
Padua, Padua, Italy.
Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) plays a pivotal role in maturation and stabilization
of proteins in conditions of stress. Many HSP90 client proteins are involved in
oncogenic signaling and cancer progression, therefore HSP90 inhibitors have a
potential as pharmaceutical agents. We reported a strong HSP90 overexpression
in corticotroph adenomas and the treatment with C-terminal HSP90 inhibitors has
potent anti-tumorigenic and anti-secretory effects in these tumors in vitro and
in vivo. In the present study, we extended this investigation to the potential role of
HSP90 in the pathogenesis of GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. We observed
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
intense HSP90 immunoreactivity in 8 out of 25 GH-secreting pituitary tumors. To
study the therapeutic potential of HSP90 inhibition in these tumors, we treated the
GH-secreting tumor cell line GH3 with C- and N-terminal HSP90 inhibitors and
measured luciferase activity under the control of the rat GH promoter. The
C-terminal HSP90 inhibitors KU174 and novobiocin dose dependently decreased
GH promoter activity and KU174 was more effective than novobiocin with
maximal luciferase inhibition at 4 mM for KU174 (52%, P!0.05) and at 100 nM
for novobiocin (33%, P!0.05) compared to control. In contrast, the treatment
with the N-terminal inhibitor 17-AAG did not suppress GH promoter activity.
KU174 significantly decreased GH levels, with maximal effect at 4 mM (85%
secretion inhibition compared to controls). These results show a putative role for
HSP90  in  the  tumorigenesis  of  some  GH-secreting pituitary  tumors and  a
potential for HSP90 C-terminal inhibitors for the management of excess GH
secretion. Further experiments are needed to clarify the role of HSP90
in
GH-secreting  tumors  and  the  mechanisms  driving  the  inhibitory  action  of
C-terminal HSP90 inhibitors on GH production and secretion.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP859
EP860
Evidence for better response to somatostatin analogues in acromegalic
patients treated with metformin
Moritz Winkelmann1, Victor Geraedts1, Kristin Lucia1, Sylvère Stormann2,
Michael Buchfelder3, Gunter Stalla1 & Marily Theodoropoulou1
1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Neuroendocrinology, Munich,
Germany;2Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig Maximilian
University, Munich, Germany;3University Erlangen, Neurosurgical Clinic,
Erlangen, Germany.
Somatostatin analogues (SSA) are the mainstay of pituitary-targeted pharma-
cological treatment in acromegaly, but are characterized by high incidence of
resistance in half of cases. The successful management of acromegaly involves in
addition  to  targeting  biochemical  control  the  treatment  of  the  metabolic
comorbidities and hypopituitarism. In this study we analysed the impact of the
concomitant antidiabetic treatment and hormone replacement on the response to
SSA. Data were collected from 49 acromegalic patients: 45 had transsphenoidal
surgery (35 as primary therapy), 36 SSA (11 as primary treatment). All patients with
diabetes mellitus (25%) received metformin. Hypopituitarism affected 18 patients.
Binary logistic regression analysis (SPSS software) showed no correlation between
SSA (PZ0.71) and transsphenoidal surgery (PZ0.541) on pituitary insufficiency
incidence. Regression analysis showed no correlation between IGF-I lowering
response to SSA and substitution treatment with hydrocorticosterone, testosterone
or L-thyroxin (variance inflation factor !3). Linear regression analysis showed no
correlation between age, gender, disease duration, hormone substitution modalities
and change of IGF-1 levels after SSA treatment. However, the same analysis
showed correlation between metformin therapy and IGF-I levels after  SSA
treatment
(PZ0.031; R-square change:
0.135;  R-square:
0.321). In vitro
investigation on 7 human acromegalic tumours showed that metformin (500 mM)
enhances the GH-suppressive effect of octreotide (1nM) (% of control 63G13
versus 81G12). Metformin alone significantly suppressed GH secretion at the 1mM
concentration (64G13) and similar observations were obtained on the rat GH
promoter activity and GH secretion from rat immortalized GH-secreting GH3 cells.
These preliminary observations indicate that hormone replacement does not affect
SSA response, but metformin treatment improves it in terms of IGF-I reduction.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP860
EP861
The vasoinhibin solution structure appears unfolded, dynamic, and
features aggregation
Jakob Triebel1, Nicole Schauer1,2, Federico del Río Portílla3,
Manuel Aguilar4, Juan-Pablo Robles4, Gonzalo Martínez de la Escalera4,
Carmen Clapp4 & Thomas Bertsch1
1Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Laboratory Medicine and Transfusion
Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University, Nuremberg, Germany;2Georg
Simon Ohm University, Nuremberg, Germany;3Instituto de Química,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Delegacíon
Coyoacan, México D.F., Mexico;4Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Campus UNAM-Juriquilla,
Querétaro, Mexico.
Background
Full-length  human  prolactin
(protein  data  bank  identification  P01236),  the
precursor of vasoinhibins, is structurally classified as a class-I helical cytokine
with a four-helix bundle core and only a minimal degree of dark regions.
Experimental data on the solution structure of vasoinhibins are not available.
Methods
A recombinant,  human  vasoinhibin  with  a  molecular  mass  of
16.7
kDa,
comprising amino acids 29-176 of prolactin, was expressed in E. coli and
purified. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were obtained (1D 1H, 2D
TOCSY, 500/700 Mhz, and 2D NOESY, 950 Mhz). A homology modelling of the
expected three-dimensional vasoinhibin structure, employing the I-TASSER web
server, was performed. The purified vasoinhibin sample was subjected to sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western Blotting was
performed using polyclonal and monoclonal, epitope-mapped anti-prolactin and
anti-vasoinhibin antibodies.
Results
1D NMR spectra at several conditions of pH, buffer and temperature demonstrated
broad vasinhibin signals in a very narrow region with small differences between all
spectra. Titration with trifluoroethanol and lithium chloride had minimal effect.
TOCSY and NOESY experiments corroborated the results of all 1D experiments.
Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western Blotting
analyses demonstrated an anti-vasoinhibin antibody immunoreactive band with an
apparent  molecular  mass  of
16  kDa,  consistent  with  the  presence  of  the
recombinant vasoinhibin-protein. Further immunoreactive bands of unknown
identity with molecular masses of 28 and 35 kDa were detected.
Conclusion
Broad and little dispersion of few NH signals are interpreted as an unfolded
vasoinhibin-protein in fast motion. Further NMR-studies are also complicated by
possible aggregates of higher molecular masses. The homology model of the
vasoinhibin structure did not correspond to NMR-data, and is thus considered
unsuitable. The vasoinhibin structure hence retains a high degree of darkness.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP861
EP862
The silent somatotroph tumours
Laura Chinezu1, Alexandre Vasiljevic2,3, Marion Lapoirie2,4,
Jacqueline Trouillas2,3, Emmanuel Jouanneau5,6 & Gerald Raverot4,5
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tirgu Mures, 540139, Mures,
Romania;2Université Lyon 1, Lyon, F-69372, France;3Centre de
Pathologie Est, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron,
F-69677, France;4Fédération d’Endocrinologie, Groupement Hospitalier
Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, F-69677, France;5INSERM U1052;
CNRS UMR5286; Cancer Research Center of Lyon 1, Lyon, F-69372,
France;6Service de Neurochirurgie, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Bron, F-69677, France.
Introduction
Silent somatotroph tumours are GH immunoreactive (IR) pituitary tumours
without clinical and biological signs of acromegaly. In our series, they represent
16% of all the somatotroph pituitary tumours. The aim of our study was to
compare the somatotroph tumours with and without acromegaly to a better
characterization of these silent tumours.
Materials and methods
Fifty-nine tumours with acromegaly and 21 silent somatotroph tumours were
studied. They were classified into monohormonal (pure GH) and plurihormonal
(GH/PRL/GTSH) and into densely (DG) and sparsely granulated (SG) types. The
proliferation
(Ki-67 index, mitosis count), the differentiation
(expression of
somatostatin receptors SSTR2A-SSTR5 and Pit-1) and the secretory activity
(% of GH IR cells) were compared in the 2 groups of patients.
Results
The silent somatotroph tumours were more frequent in women than in men
(P!0.01), most of them (76% versus 35%) were plurihormonal (P!0.01), more
frequently SG (67% versus 46%) and showed a lower percentage of GH IR cells
(P!0.0001) than the tumours with acromegaly. In somatotroph tumours with and
without acromegaly, the expression of both SSTR2A-5 was significantly lower in
SG tumours than in DG ones (P!0.0004 and P!0.02 respectively). The silent
plurihormonal tumours were larger (P!0.01), had a lower percentage of GH IR
cells (P!0.0001), a higher Ki-67 index (P!0.006) and a lower expression of
Pit-1 (P!0.002) than the plurihormonal tumours with acromegaly.
Conclusions
The silent somatotroph tumours are different from the tumours with acromegaly.
However, the monohormonal GH tumours with and without acromegaly are very
similar.  In  contrast,  the  frequent  silent  plurihormonal  tumours  are  less
differentiated  and  more  proliferative  than  the  plurihormonal  tumours  with
acromegaly. A low secretory activity of these tumours might explain the normal
plasma values of GH and IGF1 and the absence of clinical signs of acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP862
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP863
Polychlorinated biphenyls affect apoptosis of pituitary cells through
extrinsic and intrinsic pathways
Francesco Raggi1, Dania Russo1, Claudio Urbani1,2, Daniele Cappellani1,
Luca Manetti1, Chiara Sardella1, Isabella Lupi1, Ilaria Scattina1,
Luca Tomisti1, Claudio Marcocci1, Enio Martino1 & Fausto Bogazzi1
1University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy;2Sant’Anna School of Advanced Study, Pisa,
Italy.
Introduction
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are environmental pollutants that modulate
endocrine functions, induce tumorigenesis, and regulate apoptosis in several
tissues; however, their effects on the apoptosis of pituitary cells is unknown.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the PCBs influence on the apoptosis of
normal pituitary cells and elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved.
Methods
Primary cell cultures from mouse pituitary glands were exposed to a PCBs
mixture (Aroclor 1254) or dioxin-like (PCB-77, PCB-126) or non-dioxin-like
(PCB-153, PCB-180) congeners. Apoptosis was assessed by Annexin V staining,
DNA fragmentation, and TUNEL assay. The expression and activity of intrinsic
and  extrinsic  pathways  were  evaluated  by  Western  blot.  Thyroid  hormone
receptor (TR), aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and CYP1A1 antagonists were
used to examine the mechanisms of PCBs action.
Results
Aroclor 1254 induced apoptosis of pituitary cells as well as an increase in the
expression and activity of caspase-8 and caspase-3, whereas the expression and
activity of caspase-9 was unmodified. PCB-180 affected the extrinsic pathways by
an increase in the expression of TNF-a, TRAIL and TRADD whereas PCB-153
reduced the apoptosis through a decrease in the expression of TNF-a, FAS-L,
TRADD, and FADD. The intrinsic pathway was not influenced by PCB-180
whereas PCB-153 affected it by an increase of PI3K-AKT and a reduction of the
p38-p53 pathways. The anti-apoptotic phenotype of PCB-153 was counteracted
by a TR or CYP1A1 antagonists, whereas the pro-apoptotic effect of PCB 180 was
prevented by an AhR antagonist. In contrast, the dioxin-like congeners did not
affect apoptosis. The apoptosis induced  by Aroclor
1254 or PCB-180 was
associated with a reduction in cell proliferation, whereas the decreased apoptosis
due to PCB-153 increased cell proliferation by 30%.
Conclusions
Non-dioxin-like PCBs may modulate apoptosis and the proliferation rate of
pituitary  cells  having  pro-  or  anti-apoptotic  effects  depending  on  specific
congeners.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP863
EP864
Circadian clock expression in anterior pituitary gland is altered in
different thyroid conditions
Paula Bargi-Souza1, Rodrigo A. Peliciari-Garcia1,2 & Maria Tereza Nunes1
1Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil;2Department of Biological Sciences, Federal University of São
Paulo, Diadema, SP, Brazil.
The hypo and hyperthyroidism alter the synthesis/secretion of pituitary hormones,
which in normal conditions present fluctuations in serum concentration during the
24h period. An intrinsic pituitary circadian clock might be related to these
oscillations;  however,  the  possible  interaction  between  thyroid  hormonal
conditions and circadian clock gene expression in anterior pituitary is still
unknown. The purpose of this study was to investigate the expression of core
circadian clock as Bmal1, Per2 and Clock, and Tshb, Prl, Lhb and Dio2 as
markers of thyrotroph, lactotroph, gonadotroph function and thyroid hormone
action respectively, during hypo and hyperthyroidism in rats.
For this, male Wistar rats were divided in euthyroid, hypothyroid (thyroidecto-
mized rats) and hyperthyroid (euthyroid animals treated for 5 days with T3:
1.5 mg/100g  BW,  twice  a day)  and  euthanized  every  3h, during
24h.  The
pituitaries were excised and the mRNA expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR,
using Rpl19 as internal control. One and Two-way ANOVA, as well as, cosinor
analysis were used to evaluate the time-of-day-dependent differential expression
for each gene/group and their interactions.
The  expression  of  Bmal1,  Per2,  Dio2,  Prl  and  Lhb  presented  a  circadian
rhythmicity in anterior pituitary of euthyroid rats. Per2 and Dio2 acrophases
occurred around ZT 12, while Bmal1, Lhb and Prl were at ZT 0/24. In the hypo
and hyperthyroid animals, the circadian pattern of Per2, Prl and Lhb was
abolished. Bmal1 expression lost its circadian pattern during hypothyroidism,
while  the  hyperthyroidism  reduced  its  acrophase  and  mesor  values.  In
hypothyroid animals the acrophase of Dio2 was advanced and mesor was higher
than in euthyroid rats, while in hyperthyroidism its circadian pattern was lost.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Our study reveals that the expression of core clock components in anterior
pituitary gland are altered during the hyper and hypothyroidism, which might
contribute to the altered secretion of pituitary hormones observed in these
pathological conditions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP864
EP865
mTOR pathway: its role in regulating GH secretion in a rat pituitary
adenoma cell line
Carmelina Di Pasquale, Erica Gentilin, Mariaenrica Bellio,
Katiuscia Benfini, Simona Falletta, Eleonora Riva, Ettore degli Uberti &
Maria Chiara Zatelli
Department Medical Sciences, Section of Endocrinology and Internal
Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
Acromegaly results from excess growth hormone (GH) secretion, due to a
pituitary adenoma. Surgery is the first option recommended for treatment of GH
secreting pituitary adenomas; medical therapy, mostly represented by somato-
statin analogues (SSA), is most often used if surgery is not successful. Insulin-like
Growth Factor-1 (IGF-1) physiologically reduces GH levels through an endocrine
negative feedback loop. IGF-1 exerts its effects also through PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway activation and regulates different cellular processes.
The aim of this study is to understand whether PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway can
influence IGF-1 feed-back in a rat pituitary adenoma cell line (GH3 cells). We
used three inhibitors: Everolimus (mTOR inhibitor), NVP-BEZ235 (mTOR and
PI3K inhibitor) and LY294002 (PI3K inhibitor) in the presence or in the absence
of IGF-1. We evaluated cell viability by ATPlite Assay, GH secretion by ELISA
and Akt phosphorylation by Western blot.
We found that cell viability was induced by IGF-1 (C30%) and reduced by
Everolimus up to 30%; this effect was not counteracted by IGF-1. NVP-BEZ235
reduced cell viability and IGF-1 counteracted this effect. GH secretion was
reduced by IGF-1 (40%); this effect was not affected by Everolimus, but was
blocked by NVP-BEZ235. Moreover, IGF-1 induced Akt phosphorylation, that
was enhanced by Everolimus and completely abolished by NVP-BEZ235. To
validate these results, we assessed LY294002 alone and with IGF-1, confirming
that IGF1 increases Akt phosphorylation while LY294002 arrest this effect.
These results show that IGF-1 is an important regulator of cell proliferation and
GH secretion in pituitary cells and that PI3K/Akt/mTOR inhibitors may modulate
IGF-1 signaling. This pathway has a role in IGF-1 negative feedback on GH
secretion, through Akt inhibition. Therefore, mTOR pathway may represent a
possible target for treatment of GH-secreting pituitary adenomas.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP865
EP866
Retrospective evaluation of pituitary tumours in a single tertiary care
institution
Dimitrios Askitis, Christof Kloos, Wilgard Battefeld, Gunter Wolf &
Ulrich Alfons Muller
Department of Internal Medicine III, Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany.
Introduction
We retrospectively evaluated all patients with pituitary tumours treated in our
department from 1.1.1997-1.11.2014
Patients and methods
215 patients (124 females: 91 males, mean age 50,9 y.) were treated because of
pituitary tumours. All patients underwent basal hormonal analysis and testing in
order to check for hormonal activity. Pituitary masses were divided into groups
concerning their hormonal status and were further classified according to gender,
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
age at diagnosis, tumour size and the development of postoperative pituitary
insufficiency when neurosurgical intervention was conducted.
Results
121 patients had hormonally inactive tumours (non-functional adenomas; 56.3%),
57 prolactinomas (26.5%), 17 growth-hormone secreting adenomas (7.9%), 16
Cushing’s disease (7.4%) and 4 craniopharyngiomas (1.9%). Tumours with size
!1 cm (microadenomas) were detected in 62 patients (28.8%) and O1 cm
(macroadenomas) in 153 (71.2%) of all cases (rate 1:2,5). 98 patients (45.6%)
were operated (87 transsphenoidal and 11 transcranial), of this group 34/90
(37.8%)  with  hormonally  active  tumours.  Indications  for  surgery  were  an
increased risk or manifestation of chiasma syndrome and/ clinical symptoms due
to hormonal hypersecretion. Immunohistochemical stainings of the hormonally
inactive tumours detected 18 gonadotrophic adenomas, 28 null-cell adenomas, 10
adenomas with other focal hormonal expression, 1 Rathke’s cleft cyst, 2 cysts and
1 pituitary lesion because of hypophysitis. Complete (32 cases (32.6%)) or partial
(33 cases (33.7%)) postoperative hypopituarism in minimum 1 pituitary axis was
present in 65/98 (66.3%) of the operated patients.
Conclusions
Pituitary  adenoma  prevalence  is  rising due  to  widely  available  imaging
procedures. The majority of the tumours in our cohort were macroadenomas
and hormonally inactive. Tumour extirpation via transphenoidal or transcranial
adenectomy resulted in functional pituitary impairment in 2/3 of the patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP866
EP867
HMGA2 as new biomarker of pituitary adenomas invasiveness?
Bruno Almeida Nunes1,2, Sérgio Filipe Portovedo1,2, Fernanda
Oliveira Graça1,4, Gilvan Nascimento4, Nathalie Henriques Canedo5,
Paula Soares1,6, Denise Pires de Carvalho1,3, Christina Maeda Takiya3,
Manuel dos Santos Faria1,4 & Leandro Miranda-Alves1,2
1Grupo de Pesquisa em Endocrinologia Experimental-GPEEx, Instituto de
Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil;2Pós-gradua
¸a˜o em Endocrinologia, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;3Instituto de
Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil;4Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal do
Maranh
˜o, São Luis do Maranha˜o, Brazil;5Faculdade de Medicina, Serviço
de Anatomia Patológica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil;6Cancer Biology Group, Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia
Molecular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Proper classification of pituitary adenomas (PA) is an important area of research.
Thus, developing of new biomarkers is essential to facilitate the early detection of
PA, identify the drug response and predict recurrence reliably in all patients. The
usual histological markers of tumor aggressiveness and/or invasiveness are often
similar between recurring, regrowing, and stable tumors, and therefore are not
reliable as prognostic parameters. To quantitate the levels of the HMGA2 gene
expression we analysed 41 PA samples for the specific HMGA2 mRNA levels
by  a  qPCR  assay.  We  are  evaluated
12
Somatotropinomas,
20
NFPA,
7
Corticotropinomas,
1
Gonadotropinoma  and
1
Prolactinoma.  Based  on
preoperative tomography computerized (TC) images the PA were classified as
invasive or non-invasive. Aggressiveness is defined by clinical behaviour and
tumours were considered aggressive when the Ki-67 index was R 3%. Here, we
show by qPCR that HMGA2 mRNA expression significantly correlates with
invasiveness. HMGA2 expression levels were higher in non-invasive PA (*PZ
0.0154)  and  significantly  higher  in  non-invasive  NFPA
(**PZ0.0087).  In
addiction, we evaluated the possible relationship of Ki-67 labeling index with
HMGA2 expression as a predictor of tumor prognostic. No significant association
was found.
Keywords: Pituitary Adenoma, HMGA2, Invasiveness, Ki-67, Aggressiveness
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP867
EP868
Serum proteases do not cleave prolactin to vasoinhibins at
physiological pH
Jakob Triebel1, Nicole Schauer1,2, Felix Hesslinger1, Aura Ileana
Moreno-Vega3, Gonzalo Martínez de la Escalera3, Carmen Clapp3 &
Thomas Bertsch1
1Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Laboratory Medicine and Transfusion
Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University, Nuremberg, Germany;2Georg
Simon Ohm University, Nuremberg, Germany;3Instituto de Neurobiología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Campus
UNAM-Juriquilla, Querétaro, Mexico.
Background
The prolactin/vasoinhibin axis constitutes a novel endocrine axis in which the
generation,  secretion,  and  actions  of  the  pituitary  hormones  prolactin  and
vasoinhibins are under control of the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland, and of
regulators in the target tissue microenvironment. Vasoinhibins are generated in
the pituitary gland and in multiple target tissues through proteolytic cleavage of
prolactin; it is not known wether they are also produced in the circulation.
Methods
Human serum or plasma and recombinant human prolactin (corresponding to
protein data bank identification P01236) were incubated at 37 8C, alone and in
combination, with a variation of pH, time, and buffer composition. The samples
were resolved on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and
Western Blotting was performed using polyclonal and monoclonal, epitope-
mapped anti-prolactin and anti-vasoinhibin antibodies.
Results
Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western Blotting
analyses demonstrated an anti-prolactin antibody immunoreactive band with an
apparent  molecular  mass  of
23  kDa,  consistent  with  the  presence  of  the
recombinant  prolactin-protein.  Samples  incubated  throughout  a  time  period
ranging  from
10
minutes  to
24
hours  at  pH
7.4
did  not  demonstrate
immunoreactive bands lower than 23 kDa. An anti-vasoinhibin immunoreactive
band featuring an apparent molecular mass of 17 kDa was intermittently observed
in samples incubated at pH 3.4.
Conclusion
Vasoinhibin generation by enzymatic cleavage of prolactin does not occur in
human  serum  under  physiological  conditions.  Thus,  the  generation  of
vasoinhibins seems to be restricted to the pituitary gland and the target tissue
level. A limited proteolysis of prolactin, resulting in the generation of a prolactin-
fragment with an apparent molecular weight of 17 kDa seems to occur at acid pH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP868
EP869
Relationship between Insulin and somatostatin secretory response to
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose concentration in
perifused rat pancreatic islet cells
So Young Park & Sung-Woon Kim
Kyung Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Objective
The exogenous somatostatin inhibits insulin secretion in pancreatic cell and could
lead to hyperglycemia. But, Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) has insulinotropic
actions despite stimulating somatostatin secretion in d cell. So, we examined
whether there is a time difference of insulin and somatostatin secretion after
GLP-1  stimulation  or  secretion  rate  difference  of  insulin  and  somatostatin
depending on GLP-1 concentration and glucose concentration inside the islets.
Methods
We isolated pancreatic islets from five 8-week-old male Sprague Dawley rats by
collagenase digestion. The islets were incubated in RPMI1640 medium before
experiments. The insulin and somatostatin were studied depending on glucose
(2.7,
5.5
and
16.7
mmol  as  hypo-,  normo-,  and  hyperglycemic  condition
respectively) and GLP-1 concentrations (0, 0.1, and 10 ng/ml) in perifused
isolated rat pancreatic islet cells. Because of duplication laboratory settings,
statistical analysis did not proceed and analyzed tendencies. The hormonal
analysis was conducted using ELISA kit.
Results
At 2.7 mmol glucose, insulin  and somatostatin did  not respond  to GLP-1
administration. At 5.5 and 16.7 mmol glucose, insulin and somatostatin secretion
increased  simultaneously  as  soon  as  GLP-1
administration.  As  GLP-1
concentration increased, so did insulin secretion but, somatostatin secretion was
not affected by GLP-1 concentration. After a certain level of somatostatin was
stimulated by GLP-1, somatostatin did not secreted any more. Whereas, both
insulin and somatostatin secretion increased as increased glucose concentration.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
And somatostatin secretion decreased significantly compared with baseline after
maximal secretion by GLP-1 stimulation.
Conclusion
The time difference of insulin and somatostatin secretion after GLP-1 stimulation
was not observed. And there was no secretion rate difference of insulin and
somatostatin depending on GLP-1 concentration. The somatostatin secretion rate
were  affected  by  not  GLP-1
concentration  but  glucose  concentration.  The
significant  decline  of  somatostatin  compared  with  baseline  after  GLP-1
stimulated somatostatin maximally was observed newly and additional research
is  needed  in  the  future  to  prove  that  the  fact  might  be  associated  with
insulinotrophic action of GLP-1.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP869
Pituitary - Clinical
EP870
Association between serum IGF1 levels and liver fat content in patients
with pituitary diseases
Jean-Michel Petit, Amandine Nguyen, Frederic Ricolfi, Ludwig-Serge Aho,
Benjamin Bouillet, Coralie Fourmont, Romaric Loffroy, Stephanie Lemaire,
Jean-Pierre Cercueil & Bruno Verges
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Dijon, France.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is commonly associated with obesity,
metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. NAFLD is also seen in patients with
endocrinopathies. However, the relationship between endocrinopathies and the
development of NAFLD is not well known. Both GH and IGF1 are believed to be
involved in the regulation of hepatic lipid metabolism.
Objective
In this study, we set out to determine whether liver fat content (LFC) was
associated with IGF1 levels and with GH deficiency in people with pituitary
diseases (PD).
Design, settings, and participants
Eighty eight patients with pituitary diseases and 74 healthy controls were included
in this study. LFC was measured using MRI. Hepatic steatosis was defined as LFC
O5.5%.
Results
Patients with PD were older (PZ0.001), had a higher BMI (PZ0.0005) and
higher ALAT level (PZ0.0002) than healthy controls. LFC was significantly
higher in people with PD than in controls (6.5% vs 3.2%; P!0.001). LFC was
negatively associated with the IGF1 level. Fourteen patients with PD had GH
deficiency. LFC was higher in PD patients with GH deficiency than in those
without. The prevalence of steatosis (LFC O5.5%) was higher in PD patients than
in controls (36.3% vs 14.8%; PZ0.002 respectively). The prevalence of steatosis
was higher in PD patients with GH deficiency than in those without (12/14
(85.7%) vs 20/74 (27.0%); P!0.001). In multivariate analysis, which included
patients and controls, the predictive variables for steatosis were age, BMI and
IGF1 levels, whereas the presence of pituitary diseases and gender were not
associated with steatosis.
Conclusions
Our data showed that LFC was strongly associated with IGF1 levels. These results
suggest that steatosis associated with PD is probably a consequence of GH
deficiency in patients with pituitary diseases. An evaluation of the interest of GH
treatment in GH-deficient PD patients with NASH should be evaluated.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP870
EP871
Computer vision technology in the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome -
advanced studies with a cohort matched by body mass index
Kathrin H. Popp1,2, Robert P. Kosilek2, Gunter K. Stalla1, Mareike Stieg1,
Christina M. Berr2, Martin Reincke2, Matthias Witt2, Rolf P. Wurtz3 &
Harald J. Schneider2
1Max-Planck Institut fur Psychiatrie, Munich, Germany;2Medizinische
Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Munich, Germany;3Ruhr-Universität, Bochum,
Germany.
Introduction
Cushing’s syndrome (CS) is a rare disease characterized by clinical features that
show overlap with the ‘metabolic syndrome’. Pilot studies regarding the use facial
image analysis software as a novel diagnostic tool in acromegaly and CS have
shown promising results. Distinguishing CS patients from patients that show
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
similar features without true hypercortisolism remains a challenge in clinical
practice. To address this particular problem, we evaluated the performance of this
tool for CS with a larger cohort and included controls matched by BMI.
Methods
Eighty two (22 m., 60 f.) study subjects with confirmed CS and 98 (32 m., 66 f.)
control subjects matched by age, gender and BMI were included. For the control
group we screened patients with typical clinical signs (metabolic syndrome) but
biochemically excluded CS. Standardized frontal and profile facial photographs
were acquired using a regular digital camera. The images were analyzed with the
software tool FIDA (facial image diagnostic aid). A grid of nodes was semi-
automatically placed on relevant facial structures. Classification was done using
a combination of Gabor wavelet transformation and geometrical analysis and a
maximum likelihood classifier. Classification accuracy was calculated using
a leave-one-one cross-validation procedure.
Results
The mean BMI and age of the study cohort, stratified by gender, did not differ
significantly (t-test, PO 0.05). The correct classification rates were: 10/22 (45%)
for male patients and 26/32 (81%) for male controls, 34/60 (57%) for female
patients and 43/66 (65%) for female controls. The classification rates by etiology
of CS were: Adrenal CS 3/8 (m), 7/13 (f); Cushing’s disease 4/8 (m), 18/37 (f) and
Iatrogenic CS 2/3 (m), 8/9 (f).
Conclusion
Regarding the advanced problem of detecting CS patients within a BMI-matched
cohort, we have found a satisfying classification accuracy by facial image
analysis. Classification accuracy would most likely be significantly higher in a
study  cohort with healthy control  subjects.  Further studies might pursue a
different combination of nodes and equations in the analysis for improving the
method.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP871
EP872
Endocrinologic outcomes of gamma knife radiosurgery for acromegaly:
from an endocrine clinic
Meliha Melin Uygur, Oguzhan Deyneli & Dilek Gogas Yavuz
Department of Endcorinology and Metabolism, Marmara University School
of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Although  surgical  resection  is  the  usual  initial  treatment  for  patients  with
acromegaly, it does not always lead to a remission. Gamma knife radiosurgery
(GKRS) is an important additional strategy for unresected clinically active
pituitary adenomas.
Objective
We evaluated retrospectively pituitary hormone status as well as the efficacy of
GKRS for patients with acromegaly referred to our tertiary endocrinology clinic.
Prognostic factors related to outcomes were also analyzed.
Method
In this study we reviewed 125 patients with clinically active acromegaly underwent
GKRS at different neurosurgery clinics between 1999-2015. The median follow up
interval was 72 months (range 12-192). Anterior pituitary hormones during follow
up was recorded. Endocrine remission for acromegaly was defined as growth
hormone level ! 1 ng/ml and a normal insulin like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) level (age
and sex adjusted) off growth hormone inhibiting drugs for at least 3 months.
Endocrine control was defined as normal GH and IGF-1 levels under medication.
Results
One hundred and ten patients had undergone GKRS after transsphenoidal surgical
adenoma resection, 15 patients had primary GKRS.Thirty seven patients (29.6%)
developed a new pituitary axis deficiency; 16.8% (nZ21) had hypothyroidism,
12% nZ15) had hypogonadism. Although 11 (8.8%) had panhypopituitarism prior
to radiosurgery, only 1 patient (0.8%) developed panhypopituitarism after GKRS.
Other complication reported in one patient as visual loss.
Remission was observed in 20 (16%) patients at a median onset of 34 months after
radiosurgery and endocrine control was achieved in 77 (61.6%) patients. Patients
with lower IGF-1 and with tumors that were less invasive at the cavernous sinus
before GKRS were associated better GH remission rates. Fourteen patients had
repeat GKRS because of persistently elevated and clinically symptomatic GH,
IGF-1 levels. The median follow up interval between gamma knife radiosurgeries
was 48 months (range 12-120 months).
Conclusion
GKRS which is most often applied in clinically symptomatic acromegaly persistent
after initial microsurgery was most effective when the tumor was less invasive at
the cavernous sinus and when patient had lower IGF-1 levels before GKRS.
Previous transsphenoidal surgery for invasive macroadenomas are corresponding
risk factors for pituitary hormone deficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP872
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP873
Comorbidities and treatment patterns among patients with acromegaly
in Sweden : a register-linkage population-based study
Eva Lesén1, Daniel Granfeldt1, Aude Houchard2, Jérôme Dinet2,
Anthony Berthon2, Ingela Bjorholt1 & Gudmundur Johannsson3
1Nordic Health Economics, Gothenburg, Sweden;2Ipsen, Boulogne-
Billancourt, Sweden;3Department of Endocrinology, Institute of Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg and Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Introduction
Treatment  of  patients  with  acromegaly  is  complex,  including  surgery,
pharmacotherapy and radiotherapy. The objective was to describe comorbidities
and treatment patterns among patients with acromegaly in Sweden.
Methods
Population-based study including all patients with a first diagnosis of acromegaly
due to a pituitary adenoma in Sweden between 1 Jul 2005 and 31 Dec 2013. Data
was obtained via linkage of the National Patient Register, Swedish Prescribed
Drug Register and Cause of Death Register.
Results
Predefined selection criteria identified
358 patients (48% men, mean age at
diagnosis 50.0 [SD 15.3] years). Eighty-one percent had at least one comorbidity,
which was 88% among patients diagnosed before 2010 and 73% if diagnosed
R2010. Hypertension (40%), neoplasms outside the pituitary gland (30%),
hypopituitarism (22%) and diabetes mellitus (17%) were the most common
comorbidities. First-line treatment was initiated on average 3.7 (S.D. 6.9) months
after diagnosis; 16% received no treatment for acromegaly during the follow-up
period. Mean follow-up time from diagnosis to death or 31 Dec 2013 was 4.2 (S.D.
2.5) years. Among the 301 patients who received treatment, the most common
first-line treatments were surgery (60%), somatostatin analogues (SSA) (21%)
and dopamine agonists (14%). After primary surgical treatment, 63% received no
second-line treatment during follow-up, while 24% received SSA initiated on
average 14.0 (S.D. 14.7) months after surgery. The most common treatment after
first-line SSA was surgery (58%), performed on average 5.3 (S.D. 5.4) months
after  SSA  initiation.  Overall,
10%  had  received  growth  hormone  receptor
antagonists. Radiation therapy was performed for 16% and 8% if diagnosed
before 2010 and R2010, respectively.
Conclusions
Comorbidity in patients with acromegaly is very high. The most common first-
line treatment in acromegalic patients in Sweden was surgery, with the majority
not receiving any second-line treatment. SSA was the second most common first-
line treatment, often followed by second-line surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP873
EP874
Discrepant GH and IGF-I values in the evaluation of treated
acromegalic patients; an ongoing challenge. A meta-analysis
George Kanakis1, Alexandra Chrisoulidou2, Alexandra Bargiota3,
Zoe Efstathiadou4, Lamprini Papanastasiou5, Anastasia Theodoropoulou6,
Stylianos Tigas7, Dimitra Vassiliadi8, Stylianos Tsagarakis9 &
Maria Alevizaki10
1Athens Naval & VA Hospital, Athens, Greece;2Theagenio Cancer
Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;3University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece;
4Hippokration General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;5Athens General
Hospital G. Gennimatas, Athens, Greece;6University Hospital of Patras,
Patras, Greece;7University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece;8Attikon
University Hospital, Athens, Greece;9Evangelismos Hospital, Athens,
Greece;10Medical School of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Purpose
Growth Hormone (GH) and Insulin-like Growth Factor 1 (IGF-I) are currently the
principal biomarkers used to assess disease activity in acromegaly and any
discrepancy between them renders interpretation of results inconclusive. The
purpose of this study was to assess the frequency of discrepant results and identify
parameters that might affect the emergence of this phenomenon.
Methods
A systematic  review  of  Medline  and  Scopus  was  performed
(1987-2013)
followed by a meta-analysis to address the frequency of discrepant results
between GH and IGF-I levels. Meta-regression was performed using the year of
publication as a continuous variable and subgroup analyses included the different
types of GH testing and GH assays used, as well as the results of patients treated
with  Somatostatin  Analogues
(SSAs)  compared  to  those  treated  with  non-
pharmaceutical modalities.
Results
The analysis retrieved 39 eligible studies totaling 7071 patients. The pooled
discordance rate between GH and IGF-I was 25.7% (95% CI: 22.3-29.4) and the
predominant format was that of elevated IGF-I with normal GH levels [15.3%
(95% CI: 12.5-18.7)]. No significant correlation between the discordance rate and
the year of publication was shown, whereas, the use of ultrasensitive GH assays
resulted in higher discordance rates (30.7%, 95% CI: 25.9-35.9 vs. 19.8%, 95%
CI: 14.1-27.2, PZ0.04). Patients receiving SSAs presented a discordance rate
significantly higher than those not on SSA treatment (32.5%, 95% CI: 27.8-37.4)
vs. (21.6%, 95% CI: 17.8-25.6, PZ0.001)
Conclusions
Discrepancy between GH and IGF-I results is encountered in a quarter of treated
patients with acromegaly, especially when using ultrasensitive GH assays or in
patients receiving SSAs, a fact that the clinician should take into consideration
when making clinical decisions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP874
EP875
Gender aspects in the biochemical control of acromegaly in Austria:
evaluation of 607 cases from the Austrian Acromegaly Registry
Greisa Vila1, Harald Dobnig2, Engelbert Knosp1, Christoph Schnack3,
Holger Franz4, Gerd Finkenstedt5, Georg Leb2 & Anton Luger1
1Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria;2Medical University of
Graz, Graz, Austria;3Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, Austria;4Lohmann
and Birkner Health Care Consulting GmbH, Berlin, Germany;5Medical
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
The Austrian Acromegaly Registry is an initiative of the Austrian Society for
Endocrinology  and  Metabolism.  This  database  includes
607  patients
(54%
females) followed in twelve centers. Mean treatment period is 10.7 years (range
0-50 years), the total number of patient-years is 6470. Here we report gender-
specific differences in the presentation, therapy and biochemical control of
acromegaly in patients included in this registry.
Mean age at diagnosis was 46.7 years for females and 44.1 years for males.
Younger age at diagnosis of acromegaly and male sex were associated with larger
tumour size (PZ0.001). Co-morbidities were found to be more prevalent in
females, where hypertension was observed in 50% of the cases (45% in males),
diabetes in 29% (24% in males) and both hypertension and diabetes in 20% (as
compared to 15% in males). Mortality rates were 2.9% in males and 3.3% in
females, but mean age at death was 63 years for men and 73 years for women.
Data on biochemical control were collected in 476 patients with acromegaly and
disease duration longer than 9 months, who were last visited between 2003 and
2014. Disease control was evaluated by GH less than 1.0 ng/ml during an oral
glucose suppression test and/or normal age- and gender-specific IGF-1. These
outcome data were available for 414 patients, 55% were females. At the last visit,
71%  of  the  patients  were  biochemically  controlled.  Female  gender  was  a
significant predictor of biochemical control (PZ0.011), as 77% of females but
only 64% of males showed normal IGF-1 and/or GH nadir during OGTT. Fifty
percent of females and 62% of males with biochemically controlled disease
receive concomitant medical therapy for acromegaly.
In summary, male patients with acromegaly are diagnosed at younger age and
have larger tumors. Although the prevalence and co-morbidities of acromegaly
are higher in females, both biochemical control of the disease and life expectancy
are remarkably better in women.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP875
EP876
ACRO-POLIS study: differences of symptoms and comorbidities in 472
acromegalic patients according the sex of patients and sources of clinical
data
Philippe Caron1, Philippe Chanson2, Gérald Raverot3, Antoine Tabarin4,
Anne Cailleux5, Brigitte Delemer6, Peggy Pierre Renoult7,
Aude Houchard8, Pauline Cloitre8 & Thierry Brue9
1Department of Endocrinology, CHU Larrey, Toulouse, France;2Depart-
ment of Endocrinology, CHU Kremlin-Bicêtre, Kremlin-Bicêtre, France;
3Department of Endocrinology, Hôpital Neuro-Cardiologique, Lyon,
France;4Department of Endocrinology, CHU Haut Lévêque,
Bordeaux, France;5Department of Endocrinology, CHU Bois Guillaume,
Rouen, France;6Department of Endocrinology, CHU Robert Debré, Reims,
France;7Department of Endocrinology, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France;
8Ipsen Lab, Boulogne-Billancourt, France;9Department of Endocrinology,
CHU Conception, Marseille, France.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Acromegaly is characterized by excessive secretion of GH and increased IGF-1
levels caused by benign pituitary adenoma. The ACRO-POLIS study describes
symptoms and comorbidities of acromegaly at diagnosis in a large cohort of
patients diagnosed between 2009 and 2014 in France.
Methodology
Observational, cross-sectional, multicentre study included adult patients with
acromegaly diagnosed for less than 5 years. Data were collected retrospectively
from patient medical files and from patients’questionnaires.
Results
472 patients were included. Mean (GS.D.) age was 51.9 (G14.3) years and 57.2%
were female. GH- and GH/PRL-secreting pituitary adenomas were reported in
78.8% and 18.2% of patients, respectively. Most patients had a macroadenoma
(80.5%). At diagnosis, mean (GS.D.) GH level and IGF-1 level were 18.7
(G30.1)  ng/L  and
295
(G160) %ULN respectively. Mean time between
symptom or comorbidity onset and diagnosis of acromegaly was 5.1 (G6.75)
years. The symptoms are mainly morphological manifestations, snoring and
weight gain and were detected earlier in females than in males [enlargement of
hands: 7.4 (G7.4) years vs. 5.6 (G6.3) years; enlargement of feet: 6.7 (G6.7)
years vs. 5.8 (G7.0) years; snoring: 9.1 (G8.5) years vs. 5.9 (G6.7) years; weight
gain:
6.6
(G5.9)  years  vs.
4.9
(G5.7)  years].  Majority  of  signs  were
predominantly reported in the patient’s questionnaires and less in the patient’s
medical records. The rates of important symptoms reported only in questionnaires
are: snoring (40.4%), weight gain (50.2%), loss of libido (74.4%), rachialgia
(61.7%), asthenia (35.8%), arthropathy (30.4%).
Conclusion
In ACRO-POLIS study, symptoms and comorbidities associated with acromegaly
were  different  in  terms  of  time  to  diagnosis  between  males  and  females.
Furthermore, the study highlights the value of collecting data directly from the
patient’s questionnaire in complement with the patient’s medical record.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP876
EP877
“The incidence of central adrenal insufficiency in euvolaemic
hyponatraemia. Results of a large prospective study”
Martín Cuesta1, David Slattery1, Aoife Garrahy1, Anne Marie Hannon1,
Elizabeth Tatro1, Saket Gupta1, Mark Sherlock3, William Tormey2 &
Christopher J Thompson1
1Academic Department of Endocrinology, Beaumont Hospital/RCSI
Medical School, Dublin, Ireland;2Department of Chemical Pathology,
Beaumont Hospital/RCSI Medical School, Dublin, Ireland;3Department of
Endocrinology, The Adelaide and Meath Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
Context
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis(SIAD) is the commonest cause of
hyponatraemia.  Data  on  the  aetiology  of  SIAD  is  mainly  derived  from
retrospective studies, often with poor ascertainment of minimum criteria for
correct diagnosis. Although central adrenal insufficiency(CAI) is known to cause
euvolaemic  hyponatraemia,  the  incidence  of  undiagnosed  CAI  in  SIAD  is
unknown.
Objective
To establish the incidence of CAI in SIAD.
Design
Prospective, single-centre study from January 1st to October 1st 2015.
Patients
1323 admissions with hyponatraemia were prospectively evaluated; 573 (43.4%)
classified as SIAD. Full ascertainment of the criteria for diagnosis of SIAD was
obtained in 83% of patients.
Methods
Patients underwent a short synacthen test (SST) if 09:00 hour cortisol was!300
nmol/l.  The  diagnosis  of  CAI  was  stablished  with  symptoms  of  adrenal
insufficiency and a 09:00 hour cortisol!100 nmol/l, or cortisol peak following
SST!500 nmol/l.
Results
CNS diseases were the commonest cause of SIAD (nZ148.26%) followed by
pulmonary  diseases
(nZ111.19%)  malignancy
(nZ105.18%)  and  drugs
(nZ47.8%).
14/573
(2.4%)  had  CAI.
7/14
(50%)  were  related  to  recent
exogenous  glucocorticoid  administration;
6 patients
(42%)  had  new  onset
hypopituitarism; (pituitary apoplexy, nZ1, ipilimumab induced hypophysitis,
nZ1,  pituitary  metastasis,  nZ1,  traumatic  brain  injury
(TBI),  nZ1,  viral
meningitis, nZ1 and new diagnosis of empty sella syndrome, nZ1). One other
had CAI possibly due to previous TBI. 4 patients (28%) had a clinical diagnosis of
acute adrenal crisis. Hyponatraemia resolved in 10/14 (71%) of patients following
treatment with glucocorticoids, but 4 patients remained hyponatraemic at hospital
discharge. In this subgroup, the underlying causes were possibly SIAD due to
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
bronchiectasis
(NZ1),  COPD  (NZ1)  metastatic  malignancy
(NZ1)  and
Venlafaxine (NZ1).
Conclusion
In  this  large,  well-characterized,  prospective  cohort  of  SIAD  patients,  the
incidence of CAI was 2.4%; undiagnosed primary pituitary disease occurred in
1% of patients. Screening for CAI is an essential component of the diagnostic
approach in SIAD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP877
EP878
Perioperative plasma cortisol levels during transsphenoidal operation
of pituitary adenoma in ACTH sufficiency and deficiency
Henrik Borg1, Sigridur Fjalldal1, Peter Siesjo2, Babar Kahlon2 &
Eva Marie Erfurth1
1Department of Endocrinology Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden;
2Department of Neurosurgery Ska˚ne University Skåne University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden.
Introduction
The demand of cortisol rises during stress and to avoid acute cortisol deficiency,
patients  undergoing  transsphenoidal  surgery  at  Ska˚ne University Hospital
(Sweden) receive peri- and postoperative substitution with hydrocortisone (HC),
even at normal ACTH function. Some anesthetics are known to affect cortisol
levels.
This study  aimed to assess the perioperative cortisol plasma  levels during
transsphenoidal surgery in ACTH sufficient and deficient patients.
Description of methods/design
We studied 15 patients with transsphenoidal surgery for a pituitary adenoma. Out
of 10 patients with normal ACTH function (morning P-cortisol O400 nmol/l
and/or  O550
nmol/l  after  Synacthen);
7 patients  were  not  receiving  HC
substitution whereas the remaining 3 received the routine 50 mg iv HC. 5 patients
with ACTH deficiency received the routine iv HC of 100 mg in the morning
before surgery and with the additional 50 mg HC for an afternoon operation
(nZ2). P-cortisol was measured at the start and every 30 min during surgery
(surgery  duration
60-200
min).  Propofol  and  remifentanil  were  used  as
anesthetics.
Results
Among 7 patients with normal ACTH function, P-cortisol levels were, at the start
of surgery between 38-244 nmol/l and during the operation the levels decreased
to 24-139 nmol/l. At the time point of intrasellar manipulation a distinct rise of
the cortisol levels was noted in 6 of these 7 patients (to 350-628 nmol/l).
Correspondingly, in the 3 ACTH-sufficient patients receiving 50 mg HC at the
start of surgery, cortisol levels increased slightly, from 407 to 553, 719 to 822, and
1092 to 1180 nmol/l, respectively. In the 3 ACTH-deficient patients undergoing
surgery in the morning cortisol levels fell slightly from very high levels. In the 2
patients who received additional 50 mg HC in the afternoon cortisol levels peaked
at 1914 and 2384 nmol/l.
Conclusion
The low p-cortisol in the first phase of surgery in ACTH-sufficient patients
without HC substitution is probably explained by anesthetics. When surgery
reached the sella tursica, cortisol levels increased in 6 of 7 patients. In the ACTH
deficient patients, pre-operative HC resulted in high cortisol levels without
corresponding  increase  after  intrasellar  manipulation.  Patients  who  did  not
receive HC substitution did not show any abnormal parameters during surgery.
Supraphysiological cortisol levels were achieved after iv HC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP878
EP879
Does vitamin D status correlate with cardiometabolic risk factors in
adults with growth hormone deficiency?
Ivayla Uzunova1, Georgi Kirilov1, Sabina Zacharieva1,
Naydenka Zlatareva2 & Krassimir Kalinov3
1Clinical Centre of Endocrinology, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia,
Bulgaria;2University Hospital “Tsaritsa Yoanna - ISUL”, Medical
University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria;3New Bulgarian University, Sofia,
Bulgaria.
Introduction
Apart from being individually associated with cardiometabolic health, Vitamin D
and growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 (GH/IGF-1) axis are reported to
interplay, with a positive correlation between IGF-1 and 25-hydroxyvitamin D
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
(25(OH)D). These findings raise questions about the role of vitamin D for the
adverse cardiovascular (CV) risk profile in hyposomatotropism. Thus, the aim of
our study was to investigate the association between 25(OH)D and metabolic
syndrome (MetS), its components and other surrogate markers of CV risk.
Methods
This cross-sectional study included 129 adults with GHD, 41.9% with childhood-
onset  GHD.  Each  subject  underwent  routine  biochemical  blood  testing,
anthropometric (body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC), waist-
to-hip ratio, percent body fat (PBF), visceral fat area (VFA), skeletal muscle
mass) and blood pressure (BP) measurements. Other CV risk markers were
examined in a subsample of the initial population - high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein, adiponectin and asymmetric dimethylarginine (nZ88); intima-media
thickness of carotid arteries (nZ44). Total serum 25(OH)D was used to assess
vitamin D status and was measured by electro-chemiluminescence binding assay.
Vitamin D status and GHD were defined according to the Endocrine Society
Clinical Practice Guideline recommendations.
Results
Our data demonstrated significantly lower 25(OH)D levels among patients with
MetS (11.8G4.5 vs. 16.3G8.1 ng/ml in those without MetS, P!0.0001). Serum
25(OH)D correlated negatively and weakly with anthropometric parameters
(BMI, WC, PBF, VFA) and systolic BP.
Conclusion
The  severe  impairment  of  vitamin  D  status  in  hyposomatotropism  and  its
association with adiposity and BP warrant 25(OH)D testing in GHD patients.
Although the normalization of the vitamin D status has not been proven to
improve CV outcomes in general population, it might have beneficial effects in
GHD subjects, especially in those with obesity or hypertension. Patients with a
combination of GHD, hypovitaminosis D and MetS show an adverse CV risk
profile and need more active therapeutic care.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP879
EP880
Predictive factors of surgical outcomes in acromegaly: what’s new
in 2016?
Marion Lapoirie1, Alexandre Vasiljevic2, Muriel Rabilloud3,
Véronique Lapras4, Laura Chinezu5, Jacqueline Trouillas2,
Emmanuel Jouanneau6 & Gérald Raverot1
1Fédération d’Endocrinologie, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils
de Lyon, Bron, France;2Centre de Pathologie et Neuropathologie Est, CHU
de Lyon-GH Est, Bron, France;3Service de biostatistique, Hospices Civils
de Lyon, Lyon, France;4Service de radiologie, CHU de Lyon-GH Est, Bron,
France;5Department of Histology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Tirgu Mures, Romania;6Service de neurochirurgie, groupement hospitalier
Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France.
Introduction
In the era of personalized patient management in acromegaly, transsphenoidal
surgery remains a treatment of choice in cases where surgical cure can be
expected. In order to better target these patients and to assess the risk of
persistence/progression disease, we evaluated clinical, hormonal, radiological
and pathological predictors of surgical outcome in acromegaly.
Methods
A single-institution retrospective study from 2009 to 2015 was performed. From a
cohort of 79 acromegalic patients operated by a single operator, 63 patients with
complete pre- and postoperative work-up, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
blinded evaluation and pathological analysis, with prognostic clinicopathological
classification (J Trouillas et al.) were studied.
Results
Three month after surgery, remission rate defined by IGF-1 normalization and/or
nadir GH/oral glucose tolerance test ! 1.2 mUI/l, was 50.8%. In univariate
analysis, no biological parameter was predictive of poor outcomes. MRI-results:
tumour diameter greater than 20 mm (P!0.05) and intracavernous extension
(Knops R 3) (P!0.05) were associated with a higher probability of not being
cured. T2-weighted MRI signal was not associated with post-operative remission.
Peroperative evaluation of infrasellar (P!0.05) and intracavernous invasion (P!
0.01)  were  associated  with  a  lower  probability  of  cure.  For  pathological
assessment, grade 2a and 2b tumors were predictive of non-healing (P!0.01). In
multivariate analysis, 2a and 2b tumors, infrasellar and intracavernous invasion
remained the major predictors of poor surgical outcome.
Conclusion
This study confirms that intracavernous invasion and tumour size seems to be the
strongest  parameters  to  predict  surgical  outcomes.  Moreover,  prognostic
clinicopathological classification help to predict post-operative remission.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP880
EP881
Outcomes of surgically treated nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas
Mark Gruppetta1,2 & Josanne Vassallo1,2
1Neuroendocrine Clinic, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta;2Department of
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, Msida,
Malta.
Introduction
The sequelae of surgically treated non-functioning pituitary adenomas (NFPA) is
an important area of study to help plan management. The aim was to study all
Maltese patients who had a surgically treated NFPA and analyse the results of
surgery, risk factors for tumour recurrence/regrowth and the role of postoperative
radiotherapy.
Materials and methods
One hundred and seventy-five patients were identified as having a NFPA of whom
77 had underwent pituitary surgery. Detailed analysis of these patients was done
including their demographic details, surgical details, post-surgical management,
regrowth and recurrence patterns.
Results
63.6% of patients presented with visual field defects, 40.3% had headaches at
presentation and 87.0% had chiasmal compression by their NFPA. Residual
tumour postoperatively was evident in 67.5% of patients while 29.9% of patients
had immediate postoperative radiotherapy. Recurrence /regrowth was documen-
ted in 18.2% of patients within a median time of 3.2 (IQR: 1.6-5.6) years. Factors
that were found to be statistically significantly associated with a higher rate of
regrowth using Kaplan-Meier estimates were the presence of residual tumour
(PZ0.036), presence of cavernous sinus invasion (PZ0.034) and the lack of
postoperative  radiotherapy
(PZ0.004).  Independent  risk  factors  for  tumour
regrowth  using  multivariate  Cox  hazard  analysis  were  absence  of  post-op
radiotherapy (PZ0.010) and cavernous sinus invasion (PZ0.020).
Conclusion
By studying this cohort of patients we were able to characterise better the
outcomes  of  NFPA  management and  outline  risk  factors  which  can  effect
prognosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP881
EP882
Metabolic state in ACTH insufficient & ACTH sufficient patients with
hypopituitarism not treated for growth hormone deficiency (GHD): a
comparative study
Dragana Miljic1,2, Sandra Pekic1,2, Mirjana Doknic1,2, Marko Stojanovic1,2,
Milan Petakov1,2 & Vera Popovic1,2
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseasesc, Belgrade,
Serbia;2Belgrade University School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia.
Background
Inadequate  glucocorticoid
(GC)  replacement  may  be  associated  with  over-
exposure to GC, which can adversely influence metabolic and cardio-vascular
state of hypopituitary growth hormone deficient adult patients (A-GHD). In this
study we compared metabolic profile of ACTH insufficient and sufficient patients
in A-GHD not treated with GH.
Patients and methods
A cohort of 260 patients (age 48.6G12 years and BMI 28.7G6.6 kg/m2) with
hypopituitarism and A-GHD was divided according to ACTH status and analyzed
for antropometric and metabolic parameters including lipid status and glucose
matabolism. All ACTH insufficient patients were replaced with hydrocortisone
(10-20 mg/day in divided doses), and for other hormone deficiencies adequately.
None of the patients were treated with GH.
Results
In our cohort prevalence of ACTH insufficiency was 75.4%. ACTH insufficiency
was more prevalent in males compared to females (59.7% vs 40.5%, P!0.05).
Although our patients were overweight with adverse lipid profiles, no differences
were found between the two groups in body weight, waist to hip ratio and lipid
profile (total, LDL and HDL cholesterol, triglycerides and Lp a). Prevalence of
metabolic syndrome defined according to NCEP (3/5) criteria was similar in both
groups (33.9% vs 30.7% ACTH suff. vs ACTH insuff. PO0.05). Significant
differences were found in glucose metabolism characterized by lower glucose
leves at baseline (4.5G0.9 vs 4.8G0.8 mmol/l, PZ0.04) and during oral glucose
tolerance test (OGTT 75 g) peak (7.7G2.0 vs 8.6G2.1 mmol/l, PZ0.006) and
area under the curve values (753.3G197.6 vs 851.2G217.8 mmol/l.min PZ
0.002)  calculated using trapezoidal rule. However insulin  concentrations  at
baseline and during OGTT as well as HOMA IR were not significantly different
between ACTH sufficient and ACTH insufficient GHD hypopituitary patients.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Adverse metabolic profile in patients with hypoptuitarism and GHD is not
significantly influenced by ACTH deficiency state if it is replaced with low to
moderate doses of hydrocortisone.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP882
EP883
Disease activity and lifestyle influence the occurrence of cardiovascular
risk factors and cardiovascular events in acromegaly
Chiara Sardella1, Daniele Cappellani1, Claudio Urbani1, Luca Manetti1,
Giulia Marconcini1, Luca Tomisti1, Isabella Lupi1, Giuseppe Rossi2,
Ilaria Scattina1, Martina Lombardi1, Vitantonio Di Bello3,
Claudio Marcocci1, Enio Martino1 & Fausto Bogazzi1
1Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Endocrinology
Section, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy;2Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Unit, Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council (C.N.R.),
Pisa, Italy;3Department of Pathology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
Context
Acromegalic patients have a high-risk cardiovascular profile. However, the
determinants of cardiovascular risk factors and major cardiovascular events
(MACE),  which may develop after  diagnosis of  acromegaly, are not  fully
understood.
Objectives
To identify the predictors for systemic comorbidities and MACE, after diagnosis
of disease. The role of therapy for acromegaly on the occurrence of such
complications was also evaluated.
Patients and methods
Retrospective  cohort  study  on
200
consecutive  acromegalic  patients.  The
following outcomes were evaluated: diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia and MACE. Each patient was included in the analysis for a
specific outcome if it was not present at diagnosis of acromegaly and further
classified  as:
1)  in  remission  after  adenomectomy
(Hx),
2)  controlled  by
somatostatin analogues (SSA) (SSAc) or 3) not controlled by SSA (SSAnc). Data
were evaluated using Cox regression analysis.
Results
After diagnosis of acromegaly, diabetes occurred in 40.8% of the patients (Hx
27.3%; SSAc 40%; SSAnc 65%; PZ0.002); lack of control of acromegaly was
decisive for the onset of the outcome (HRZ3.32; PZ0.006). Hypertension arose
in 35.5% of the patients (Hx 33.3%; SSAc 36.8%; SSAnc 50%; PZ0.0172). The
strongest determinants of this outcome were age at diagnosis of acromegaly
(HRZ1.059; PZ0.014) and body mass index (HRZ1.05; PZ0.014). Hyperch-
olesterolemia occurred in 47.8% of the patients without differences among the 3
groups (PZ0.322). Disease activity was a predictor of hypercholesterolemia
(HRZ2.14; PZ0.004). MACE were recorded in 12.7% of the patients (Hx 15%;
SSAc 10.9%; SSAnc 13.6%; PZ0.247). Age at diagnosis of acromegaly (HRZ
1.09; PZ0.005) and smoking habit (HRZ5.95; PZ0.001) were associated with
an increased risk of MACE.
Conclusion
After diagnosis of acromegaly, control of disease (irrespectively to the type of
treatment) and lifestyle are predictors of the occurrence of cardiovascular risk
factors and cardiovascular events.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP883
EP884
Hyperprolactinaemia causes and manifestation in outpatient practice
Lina Zabuliene1,2, Modesta Petraviciute3, Birute Pauliukiene2,
Airida Audrone Bagdziuniene4 & Jurgita Urboniene5
1Clinics of Rheumatology, Traumatology - Orthopaedics and Reconstruc-
tive Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania;
2Antakalnio outpatient clinic, Vilnius, Lithuania;3Faculty of Medicine,
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania;4Centre of Endocrinology, Vilnius
University Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania;5Infectious
Diseases and Tuberculosis Hospital, Vilnius University hospital Santariskiu
klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Hyperprolactinaemia is a common endocrine disorder. Causes are related to
physiological factors, pharmacological intervention and pathological conditions.
There are a wide variety of drugs that can induce a significant hyperprolactinae-
mia frequently associated with clinical symptoms. The aim was to analyse clinical
manifestation of hyperprolactinaemia in routine clinical practice.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Material and methods
We  conducted  retrospective  review  of  medical  records  of  patients  with
hyperprolactinaemia (serum prolactin concentration O1000 mIU/l) treated at
Vilnius Antakalnio outpatient clinic in 2011-2014. Pregnant and lactating women
and patients with macroprolactin were excluded. We recorded demographic data,
medical history, LH, FSH, TTH, LT4, anti-TPO concentration and MRI results.
Results
We analysed data of 68 patients (4.4% male and 95.6% female). Mean age was
31.60G9.23 years. Mean prolactin concentration was 1448.75G526.78 mIU/l.
Irregular cycles were observed in 48.5% of women, galactorrhoea in 20.6%,
infertility in 20.6%. Headache was present in 17.6% of patients, body weight gain
in 13.2%. The most frequent concomitant diseases were thyroid disorders (41.2%),
mental illnesses, including usage of antidepressants or neuroleptics (14.7%) and
polycystic ovary syndrome (7.4%). 76.4% of patients were treated with dopamine
agonists (bromocriptine or cabergoline). 50.0% of the patients underwent MRI:
pituitary microadenoma was diagnosed in 13 patients, macroadenoma in 2, empty
sella syndrome in 1 and pituitary cyst in 1. MRI results of 17 patients didn’t show
any pathology. Patients with pituitary pathology were older than those with normal
MRI results (35.35G9.41 vs. 27.88G8.14 years, PZ0.012). There was no
difference in prolactin concentration, frequency of complains, BMI, underlying
diseases and hormone concentration between groups. In a group of patients
without pituitary pathology anti-TPO was associated with prolactin level (rZ
0.900, PZ0.037).
Conclusion
Main clinical manifestation of hyperprolactinaemia was menstrual irregularity,
galactorrhoea and headache. In routine practice up to 50% of hyperprolactinaemia
cases were associated with causes other than pituitary tumours.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP884
EP885
What is the outcome of nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas (NFPAs)
after surgery and are there any factors to predict it: a multicenter study
in Northern Spain
Maria Galiana Rodriguez Caballero1, Nuria Valdés Gallego1, Jessica Ares3,
Ihintza Larran˜aga2, Cecilia Hernández Morhain3, Dolores Ollero2,
Sonia Gaztambide3, Leire Isasa3, Lluis Forga2, Marta Mouritz2,
Lorena Suárez1, Rosa Rodriguez2, Daniela Corte1, Elías Delgado1,
Cecilia Sánchez Ragnarsson1, Lorena Suárez1, Laura Cacho1,
Joaquín Pertierra1, Antonio Rabal1 & Edelmiro Menéndez1
1Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Universitario Central
de Asturias, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain;2Departament of Endocrinology,
Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Navarra, Spain;3Department
of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario de Cruces, Bilbao, País Vasco,
Spain.
Introduction
There is scarcity of data on the recurrence and/or progression (R/P) rate in
nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas (NFPAs) after surgery and the risk factors that
can predict this outcome. So the aim of this study was to analyze a large series of
NFPAs with a long follow-up after surgery, focusing on the evaluation of R/P rate
and the risk factors associated with it.
Methods
Retrospective cohort analysis of 164 patients with NFPAs from 3 different centers
in  Northern  Spain  who  underwent  surgery  between
1987-2014.  The  main
outcomes were R/P rate during follow-up using Kaplan-Meier estimator and the
univariate and multivariate analysis of risk factors that could be involved with
R/P.
Results
R/P was detected in 70 patients (43%) after surgery, over a median clinical
follow-up of 8 years (1-27), the median time to R/P was 4.1 years. Recurrence-
free survival was 65%, 49%, 42% and 32% at 5, 10, 15 and 20 years after surgery,
respectively. The univariate analysis identified the following R/P risk factors:
pituitary apoplexy and visual impairment at diagnosis; and as protective factor:
RT after surgery in patients with subtotal resection (STR) but the multivariate
Cox analysis only confirmed as independent factors: visual impairment (hazard
ratio [HR] 2.1, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.1-4.2; PZ0,02) and RT in patients
with STR after surgery (HR 0.4, 95% CI 0.21-0.89; PZ0.02).
Conclusions
Long term follow-up in NFPAs after surgery is mandatory because R/P occurs in
a large percentage of these patients and the risk does not disappear in the long
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
term. Our study suggests that this follow-up has to be more rigorous in patients
with visual impairment at diagnosis because they have the highest risk of R/P. RT
could decrease this risk specially in those patients with subtotal tumor resection.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP885
EP886
Radiological vertebral fractures in patients with acromegaly treated
with L-thyroxine
Filippo Maffezzoni1, Stefano Frara1, Anna Maria Formenti1,
Monica Mezzone1, Luigi Cerri1, Teresa Porcelli1, Francesco Doglietto3,
Roberto Maroldi2, Gherardo Mazziotti1 & Andrea Giustina1
1Endocrinology, Brescia, Italy;2Radiology, Brescia, Italy;3Neurosurgery,
Brescia, Italy.
Acromegaly  is associated with skeletal fragility and high risk of vertebral
fractures (VFs), but the determinants of such a risk are still under investigation
and it is not clear whether replacement therapies of coexistent hypopituitarism
may influence prevalence and incidence of VFs. In this cross sectional study,
fourty acromegaly patients (24 M, 16 F; median age, 57 years; range, 25-72), 20
with active disease, were evaluated for the effects of replacement therapy of
central hypothyroidism on radiological VFs. Seven patients had glucocorticoid
deficiency, 14 had hypothyroidism and 25 were hypogonadal (5 men and one pre-
menopausal woman were on replacement therapy). Patients were evaluated for
morphometrical VFs and for bone mineral density (BMD) with DXA at lumbar
spine, total hip and femoral neck. VFs were found in 15 patients (37.5%), without
significant difference between patients with hypothyroidism and those without
hypothyroidism (50.0% vs. 30.8%; PZ0.23). Among patients with hypothyroid-
ism, those with VFs showed higher serum FT4 (13.0 pg/ml, range: 7-17 vs. 9.7
pg/ml, range: 9-16; PZ0.02) and daily levo-thyroxine (L-T4) dose (1.43 mg/kg,
range: 1.29-1.58 vs. 0.92 mg/kg, range: 0.7-1.1; PZ0.009). Serum FT4 and daily
dose of L-T4 were not significantly associated with BMD at lumbar spine,
femoral neck and total hip. VFs were also significantly associated with age of
patients (odds ratio: 1.16; C.I. 95% 1.05-1.3), untreated hypogonadism (odds
ratio: 5.8; C.I. 95% 1.4-24.2) and duration of active acromegaly (odds ratio: 1.21;
C.I. 95% 1.01-1.4), whereas no significant associations were found with treated
hypoadrenalism, sex, BMI and BMD at either skeletal sites. In conclusion, this
study  provides  a  first  evidence  that  a  relative  overtreatment  of  central
hypothyroidism may influence the fracture risk in patients with acromegaly,
consistently with the pathophysiological hypothesis that thyroid hormone excess
and GH hypersecretion may have additive negative effects on bone remodeling
and skeletal health.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP886
EP887
Long-term (19-month) control of urinary free cortisol with osilodrostat
in patients with Cushing’s disease: results from an extension to the
LINC-2 study
Rosario Pivonello1, Betul Hatipoglu2, Xavier Bertagna3, Maria Fleseriu2,
Mark E Molitch4, Chikara Shimizu5, Tomoaki Tanaka6, Akira Shimatsu7,
Beverly M K Biller8, Shoba Ravichandran9, Albert Kandra10,
Nicholas Sauter9 & Jacques Young11
1Università Federico II di Napoli, Naples, Italy;2Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA;3Hôpital Cochin, Université Paris 5, Paris, France;
4Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA;5Hokkaido University
Hospital, Sapporo, Japan;6Chiba University Hospital, Chiba-city, Japan;
7National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical Center, Kyoto, Japan;
8Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;9Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey, USA;10Novartis
Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland;11Hôpital Bicêtre, Université Paris-Sud,
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
Introduction
During the 22-week LINC-2 study, the potent oral 11b-hydroxylase inhibitor
osilodrostat normalized UFC in 15/19 (78.9%) patients with Cushing’s disease.
Most common AEs were nausea, diarrhoea, asthenia, and adrenal insufficiency.
This report describes 19-month results following an extension.
Methods
Patients who were receiving clinical benefit at week 22 could enter the extension.
Efficacy/safety is reported for patients who entered the extension. Response was
assessed exploratively by last-observation-carried-forward analysis for ongoing
patients at the specific time point. AEs are reported from core baseline until last
patient reached month 19 (maximum follow-upZ27.5 months).
Results
16/17
patients
(male:femaleZ5:11)  who  completed  the  core  entered  the
extension. Response rate
(UFC%ULN [control] or UFCOULN but O50%
decrease from baseline [partial control]) for these patients was 94% at week 22
(control: 94% [nZ15/16]; partial control: 0% [nZ0/16]) and month 19 (control:
81%  [nZ13/16];  partial  control:
13%  [nZ2/16]).  No  controlled  patients
experienced
‘escape’
(UFCOULN  at  R2  consecutive  visits  on  maximum
tolerated dose) during the extension. Blood pressure, weight/BMI remained stable
throughout treatment. In patients with diabetes history (nZ3), meanGS.D. FPG,
HbA1c  decreased by 60.7G39.3 mg/dl, 1.1G0.6% from baseline to month 19.
Two  patients  discontinued  during  the  extension
(AEs
[increased  ACTH
(maximumZ1493 pmol/l), pituitary-tumour enlargement], nZ1; consent with-
drawal, nZ1), one of whom after month 19. Most common AEs were increased
ACTH (nZ7), adrenal insufficiency, diarrhoea, and nasopharyngitis (nZ6). In
females, increases in meanGS.D. testosterone from baseline were 2.7G3.4 nmol/l
at week 22 (nZ10), 0.8G1.3 nmol/l at month 19 (nZ9). Hirsutism was reported
in one female and acne in two, which emerged before week 22. One patient
experienced QTc prolongation O450 ms during the extension (494 ms), which
was reversible on dose reduction.
Conclusions
UFC normalization was maintained for 19 months of osilodrostat treatment in
81%  of  patients  with  Cushing’s  disease.  The  long-term  safety  profile  of
osilodrostat was similar to that reported after 22 weeks.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP887
EP888
Evaluation of endothelial function and insulin sensitivity in patients
with prolactinoma
F Buket Bayram1, Bahar Tekin1 & Dilek Gogas Yavuz2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Marmara University Hospital, Marmara
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Internal
Medicine, Section of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Marmara University
Hospital, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Objective
Hyperprolactinemia  has  been  reported  to  be  associated  with  endothelial
dysfunction, abnormalities of carbohydrate metabolism and insulin sensitivity.
The aim of this study was to evaluate carbohydrate metabolism and endothelial
function of our patients in outpatient clinics.
Material and methods
In this cross-sectional study, currently or previously treated 87 hyperprolacti-
nemic patients with PRL-secreting adenoma (fifty four with microadenoma and
33 with macroadenoma; 21 men, 66 women; aged 39,9G8,8 years) and 55
healthy controls (twelve men, 43 women; aged 38.8G10 years) of comparable
gender  and  age  with  normal  PRL  values  were  included.  Anthropometric
parameters (body mass index (BMI), blood pressure and waist circumference)
and serum glucose, insulin, lipid profiles were measured. Carotid intima media
thicknesses
(CIMT)  were  measured  by  using  GE  Logic  3  Expert  Doppler
Ultrasonography  to  evaluate  endothelial  function.  Insulin  resistance  was
calculated  by  using  homeostasis  model  assessment  of  insulin  resistance
(HOMA IR) and insulin sensitivity index (ISI) Matsuda.
Results
No significant differences were observed in systolic and diastolic blood pressure
measurements or BMI values between prolactinoma and control group (OPZ
0.05). Serum lipid profile levels and waist circumference measurements were also
similar, compared to control group (Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (PZ0.42),
triglycerides (TG) (PZ0.15), high-density lipoprotein (HDL) (PZ0.48), total
cholesterol
(PZ0.17)  and  waist  circumference
(PZ0.94)).  There  were  no
significant  differences  in  CIMT  values,  HOMA  and  Matsuda  index  scores
between prolactinoma and control groups (respectively (PZ0.47), (PZ0.68),
(PZ0.54)).
Conclusion
In contrast  to  previous  studies,  BMD  and  CIMT  measurements,  insulin
resistances and serum lipid levels in prolactinoma and control groups were
similar in our study. This can be associated with that most of our patients are
under treatment or were previously treated. Although our study results support the
opinion  that  treatment  with  dopaminergic  agents  could  improve  BMD,
endothelial function and insulin sensitivity in prolactinoma patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP888
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP889
Combined treatment with octreotide LAR and pegvisomant in patients
with gigantism - acromegaly: clinical evaluation and genetic screening
Liliya Rostomyan1, Ruth Mangupli3, Emilie Castermans2,
Jean-Hubert Caberg2, Paul Camperos3, Elvia Cuauro3, Vincent Bours2,
Adrian F Daly1 & Albert Beckers1
1Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège,
University of Liège, Domaine Universitaire du Sart-Tilman, Liège,
Belgium;2Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universi-
taire de Liège, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium;3Section of
Neuroendocrinology, Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital Universitario
de Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela.
Pituitary gigantism is a rare condition caused by growth hormone secreting
lesions, where treatment is usually challenging, especially in cases with genetic
predisposition. Aim: We studied a gigantism cohort from Venezuela for genetic
defects and their response to treatment. Subjects: 160 somatotropinoma patients
were evaluated at the University hospital (from 1985-2015); eight (6M) were
diagnosed with acrogigantism and underwent genetic analysis including aCGH
for Xq26.3 duplications. Results: All patients had accelerated growth rates/tall
stature at first evaluation. The mean age at diagnosis was 18.7 years (range
12-28).  Among  other  frequent  signs/symptoms  at  presentation  were  acral
enlargement (7/8) and headache (5/8). All presented with growth hormone-
secreting  macroadenomas
(all  except  one  were  invasive)  with  prolactin
co-secretion seen in 4 cases. Six cases received primary medical treatment with
the long-acting somatostatin analogue (SSA) octreotide LAR 20 mg/28 days for
6-12 months resulting in tumor control in 64%, in 2 patients SSA treatment was
administrated after unsuccessful surgery (radiotherapy was also used in one case).
Cabergoline was added in those with elevated prolactin levels. None of the
patients had normalization of IGF-1 levels with SSA. Pegvisomant (20 mg daily)
was added. And this combination resulted in a decrease of IGF-1 levels to normal
ranges while tumor volume was stable in all patients. Regression of clinical
symptoms was seen after 1-4 months of treatment including a decrease in growth
velocity. Three novel AIP mutations were identified and none of the patients had
Xq26.3 microduplications. Clinical characteristics at baseline and treatment
responses were not different in patients with AIP mutations compared with AIP
negatives.
Conclusions
Patients with gigantism have large and aggressive GH secreting pituitary lesions
difficult to control with conventional treatment options. Prolactin co-secresion is
frequent. Combined therapy (long-lasting SSA and pegvisomant) as primary
treatment or after pituitary surgery and radiotherapy can permit the normalization
of IGF-1 levels and achieve clinical improvement in these difficult to manage
patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP889
EP890
High incidence of thyroid cancer among patients with acromegaly
Dimitrios Kaldrymidis1, Georgios Papadakis2, Georgios Tsakonas2,
Philippos Kaldrymidis2,3, Theofanis Flaskas3, Andreas Seretis3,
Eleni Pantazi4, Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou5, Melpomeni Peppa6,
Paraskevi Roussou6 & Evanthia Diamanti-Kandarakis1
1Third Department of Internal Medicine, Sotiria Hospital, Athens, Greece;
2Department of Endocrinology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus,
Greece;3Mediterraneo Hospital, Athens, Greece;4Department of Endo-
crinology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens, Greece;5Department of
Endocrinology, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece;6Department
of Interanl Medicine, Attikon Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Several studies have suggested that patients with acromegaly have an increased
risk  of  thyroid,  colorectal,  breast  and  prostate  tumors. We  determined  the
prevalence of malignant neoplasms in patients with acromegaly in a single Greek
Centre during the years 1995-2015.
Methods
We evaluated cancer risk in a cohort of 110 patients (M/F 48/62, age 58.63G13.8
years, range 30-86) with acromegaly. Mean age at diagnosis of acromegaly was
46.37G13.11 years old. A total of 42 patients had a microadenoma and 68
patients had a macroadenoma. Mean period of time since diagnosis of acromegaly
was 12.26G9.6 years. 108 patients were treated with somatostatin analogues.
Only 2 patients were successfully treated with pituitary transsphenoidal surgery
and received no medical treatment afterwards.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Results
From 110 patients, cancer was diagnosed in 26 patients. Thyroid cancer was the
most common cancer and was diagnosed in 13 patients (11.8%) and among all
other  cancers  there  were
2
patients  with  gastric  cancer,
2
patients  with
endometrial cancer, 1 patient with breast cancer, 1 patient with colon cancer, 2
patient with prostate cancer, 1 patient with myelodysplastic syndrome, 1 patient
with renal cell carcinoma, 1 patient with lung cancer and 1 patient with pancreas
carcinoma. The mean age of patients with cancer was not statistical significant
when compared with the mean age of those without cancer. There was also no
significant difference in disease duration, pituitary tumor size, or age at onset
between them.
Conclusions
This study suggests that patients with acromegaly have an increased risk of
thyroid  cancer.  In  conclusion, each  acromegalic  patient  requires  hormonal,
ultrasound evaluation of the thyroid and FNAB if required, when the diagnosis of
acromegaly is made. It is particularly essential to diagnose the patients early and
to rule out thyroid cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP890
EP891
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in patients with biochemically cured
Cushing’s disease and non-functioning pituitary adenomas: role of
adrenal insufficiency and growth hormone deficiency
Matthias K Auer, Mareike R Stieg & Gunter K Stalla
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, 80804 Munich, Germany.
Objective
Nonalcoholic  fatty  liver  disease
(NAFLD)  is  a  hallmark  of  the  metabolic
syndrome and has been shown to be an independent predictor of cardiovascular
mortality.  Although  glucocorticoids  and  growth  hormone  are  known  to  be
implicated in its pathophysiology, it has only rarely been investigated in the
context of patients with pituitary insufficiency or former cortisol excess.
Design
Case-control study, including patients with biochemically controlled Cushing’s
disease
(CD)
(NZ33)  and  non-functioning  pituitary  adenomas
(NFPA)
(NZ79).
Methods
NAFLD estimated by calculating the fatty liver index (FLI) including BMI, waist
circumference, GGT and triglyceride levels.
Results
Although there was no difference in FLI between patients with NFPA and CD, we
identified  average  daily  hydrocortisone
(HC)  intake  in  those  with  adrenal
insufficiency to be an independent predictor of FLI (bZ1.124; PZ0.017, even
after adjusting from BMI and waist circumference. In line, those with a FLI O 60
were also taking in average significantly more HC per day than those with a score
!60 (21.05 mgG5.9 vs. 17.9 mg G 4.4; PZ0.01). FLI was also the best
independent predictor for HbA1c and fasting glucose levels (both PZ0.001).
Growth hormone deficiency and replacement therapy were not associated with
FLI in either group.
Conclusion
While HC dosage affects FLI as an estimate of NFLD in patients with CD and
NFPA, the benefit of GH replacement still needs to be determined. In contrast to
reports in CD patients with active disease, NAFLD in those with biochemical
control was not different from NFPA patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP891
EP892
Early water intake restriction to prevent inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone secretion following transsphenoidal surgery: low BMI
predicts postoperative SIADH
Junko Matsuyama
Southern Tohoku General Hospital, Iwanuma, Japan.
Objective
The goals of this study were to assess the incidence of and risk factors for
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) in patients
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
following transsphenoidal surgery (TSS), and to validate the effectiveness of early
prophylactic restriction of water intake.
Design
Retrospective analysis was performed for 207 patients who had undergone TSS,
including 156 patients not placed on early prophylactic water restriction. Sixty-
four patients received treatment for SIADH.
Methods
We compared the incidence of SIADH between patients with and without early
water intake restriction, and analyzed various risk factors for SIADH using
statistical analyses.
Results
BMI was significantly lower for patients with SIADH than for those patients
without SIADH. Statistical analysis revealed that the threshold BMI predicting
SIADH was 26. Serum sodium levels on postoperative days 5-10 and daily urine
volumes on postoperative days 5-10 were significantly lower in patients with
SIADH than in those without SIADH. Postoperative body weight loss on days 6,
8, 10, and 11 was significantly higher in patients with SIADH. The incidence of
SIADH after starting prophylactic water intake restriction (14%) was significantly
lower than the rate before early water restriction (38%; P!0.05).
Conclusions
SIADH is relatively common after TSS, and serum sodium concentrations and
daily urine volumes should be carefully monitored. Patients with low preoperative
BMI should be closely observed, as this represented a significant preoperative risk
factor for SIADH. Early prophylactic water intake restriction appears effective at
preventing postoperative SIADH.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP892
EP893
Evaluation of pituitary functions in patients with traumatic max-
illofacial fractures: preliminary results
Osman Onur Daloglu1, C Alper Kemaloglu2, Fatih Tanriverdi1,
Atilla Coruh2, Irfan Ozyazgan2, Zuleyha Karaca1, Kursad Unluhizarci1 &
Fahrettin Kelestimur1
1Erciyes University Department of Endocrinology, Kayseri, Turkey;
2Erciyes University Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Kayseri, Turkey.
Introduction
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a worldwide public health problem and has been
recently documented as a cause of neuroendocrine dysfunction. It has been shown
that hypopituitarism may develop nearly 10-20% of the TBI patients, and most
common pituitary hormone deficiency after TBI is growth hormone deficiency
(GHD). To date no study has evaluated the relation between isolated maxillofacial
fractures and pituitary dysfunction. Therefore we aimed to investigate pituitary
function in patients with traumatic maxillofacial fracture.
Methods and results
Thirty patients who had traumatic maxillofacial fracture at least 12 months ago
(mean 33.6 months) were included in the study retrospectively. Twenty-six of 30
patients (86.7) were male and 4 patients (13.3%) were female, and mean age of
the study group was 39.8 years (range; 18-63). None of the patients had loss of
consciousness after head trauma and they did not hospitalized in intensive care
unit.
The type of maxillofacial fractures were as follows: One patient had blow out,
seven patients had Lefort 1-2, six patients had mandibula, three patients had nasal
and thirteen patients had zygoma fractures. Basal hormone levels, Glucagon and
1 mcg ACTH stimulation tests were performed to investigate the pituitary
functions. Four of 30 patients (13.3%) had isolated GH deficiency based on
glucagon stimulation test (GST). Mean peak GH level after GST in patients with
hypopituitarism (0.43 ng/ml) was significantly lower than the patients without
hypopituitarism (6.7 ng/ml). Other anterior pituitary hormones were normal in all
patients, and none of them had diabetes insipidus.
Conclusion
These  preliminary  results  suggest  that  there  is  a  substantial  risk  for
hypopituitarism,  GH  deficiency  in  particular,  during  the  chronic  phase  of
traumatic maxillofacial fractures. However these findings need confirmation with
further prospective studies with higher number of patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP893
EP894
Cardiac tissue Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of patients with
prolactinoma treated with cabergoline
Senay Arikan Durmaz1, Mustafa Rasid Tasdelen2, Nesligul Yildirim3,
Aydin Cifci2 & Askin Gungunes1
1Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology,
Kirikkale, Turkey;2Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Internal Medicine, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Kirikkale University Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Kirikkale, Turkey.
Introduction and aim
There are few side effects of cabergoline which is used for medical treatment of
prolactinoma. For this reason, cabergoline is considered as first-line therapy of
prolactinoma. However, chronic administration of high dose cabergoline in
patients with prolactinoma may be associated with valvular heart disease. The aim
of this study is to evaluate left ventricular systolic and diastolic functions by
conventional and tissue Doppler echocardiography in patients with prolactinoma
who have been chronically treated with cabergoline.
Materials and methods
A total of 30 patients with prolactinoma who have been treated with cabergoline
(mean age 33.4G8.5 years and body mass index (BMI): 28.1G7.8 kg/m2) were
included in this study. Thirty age- and BMI-matched (mean age 30.0G9.8 years;
BMI:  26.8G6.4
kg/m2)  hyperprolactinemia  patients  without  cabergoline
treatment were also included, and 30 age- and BMI-matched healthy subjects
(mean age 31.0G7.0 years; BMI: 25.2G2.9 kg/m2) were assigned to control
group. Cumulative cabergoline dose in patients with prolactinoma was calculated
as 218 mg. Mean duration of cabergoline therapy was 121.9G98.5 weeks (range
52-468 weeks). All patients were evaluated by transthoracic and tissue Doppler
echocardiography.  Left  ventricle  systolic  and  diastolic  functions  and  left
ventricle, left atrium diameters were measured. All biochemical and hormonal
analysis were performed by automatic analyzer.
Results
According  to  our  data,  serum  prolactin  levels  were
35.5G39.5
ng/ml  in
prolactinoma  group  during  cabergoline  treatment,
58.3G40.5
ng/ml  in
hyperprolactinemia group without cabergoline treatment and 16.2G8.3 ng/ml
in control group. Left ventricle systolic and diastolic functions parameters were
normal among all of the study groups. However there was a positive correlation
between cumulative cabergoline dose and deceleration time (DT) (rZ0.369,
PZ!0.001) of mitral inflow signal. There was also positive correlation between
tissue Doppler longitidual myocardial velocity associated with atrial contraction
(Am) (rZ0.258, PZ0.043). Valvular regurgitation was determined in 11 patients
(36.6%) in prolactinoma group, 7 patients (23.3%) in hyperprolctinemia group
and  5  patients
(16.7%)  in  control  group.  However  the  degree  of  valvuler
regurgitation was mild and there was no significant difference between the
groups.
Conclusions
Low-dose cabergoline in patients with prolactinoma is not associated with cardiac
valvular dysfunction and also left ventricular systolic and diastolic dysfunction by
conventional and tissue Doppler echocardiography. However, high cumulative
cabergoline dose may relate to increase in DT and Am parameters that may be
related to diastolic dysfunction in the future.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP894
EP895
Preoperative markers of Cushing’s disease remission after
transsphenoidal endoscopic surgery
Natalya Gussaova, Ulyana Tsoy, Vladislav Cherebllo, Anna Dalmatova,
Lidiya Belousova, Vladislav Solntsev & Elena Grineva
Federal Almazov North-West Medical Research Centre, Saint-Petersburg,
Russia.
Purpose
Transsphenoidal  endoscopic  surgery
(TSS)  is  the  first-line  treatment  for
Cushing’s disease (CD). However, persistence and recurrence of hypercortisolism
after TSS considered important problem. In this case search for CD remission
predictors is actual.
Aim
To study the role of preoperative oral high-dose dexamethasone suppression test
(HDDST) and pituitary MRI in the prognosis of CD remission after TSS.
Materials and methods
Fifty-nine patients with Cushing’s disease (9 men, 50 women, mean age 40 years
(15-72) underwent TSS were included. Before the TSS HDDST and pituitary
MRI were performed in all cases. Postoperative examination was done one year
after surgery. Remission criteria were: secondary adrenal insufficiency (the need
for glucocorticoid replacement) or combination of normal midnight ACTH and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
serum cortisol levels, normal 24 hour urine free cortisol (UFC) excretion and
serum cortisol suppression less than 50 nmol/l in 1-mg dexamethasone test. The
optimal  threshold  value  of  serum  cortisol  suppression  in  the  HDDST  for
prediction of CD remission after TSS was calculated by ROC-analysis.
Results
One year after surgery CD remission was confirmed in 39 patients, whereas in 20
patients hypercortisolism persisted. The optimal threshold value of serum cortisol
suppression in the HDDST for prediction of CD remission after TSS was 72%.
Test’s  sensitivity  and  specificity  were
82%  and  84%,  respectively.  The
probability of wrong prediction was 17% (PZ0.0001). In our study, the results
of TSS did not correlate with MRI adenoma size.
Conclusion
According to our data serum cortisol suppression more than 72% in HDDST may
be used as a prognostic criterion for CD remission after TSS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP895
EP896
Hypertension in acromegaly patients with obstructive sleep apnea
Uliana Tsoy, Ljudmila Korostovtseva, Yurij Sviryaev, Andrej Semenov,
Darya Vaulina, Svetlana Kravchenko, Alexandra Konradi & Elena Grineva
Almazov North-West Federal Medical Research Centre, St-Petersburg,
Russia.
Purpose
Hypertension is an independent factor of cardiovascular morbidity in acromegaly
patients. Obstructive sleep disordered breathing (SDB) is the most common
respiratory impairment in acromegaly and is considered one of the mechanisms
underlying the development of hypertension in this disorder.
Aim
To study blood pressure parameters and prevalence of hypertension in naïve
acromegaly patients depending on the presence of moderate-to-severe obstructive
sleep apnea.
Materials and methods
Forty-eight naïve acromegalic patients (11 men, 37 women, median age 53.5
(27-76) years) were recruited into the study. All subjects underwent clinical
examination including office blood pressure measurement, full polysomnography,
twenty-four blood pressure monitoring (24-hour BPM).
Results
SDB, namely obstructive sleep apnea, was found in 36 (75%) patients. Thirteen
patients (36%) had mild, eleven (31%) - moderate and twelve (33%) showed
severe OSA. The latter two groups (moderate-to-severe OSA, further referred as
patients with OSA) were compared to patients without OSA (non-OSA). In
patients with OSA office diastolic blood pressure was significantly higher than in
patients without OSA (P!0.03). According to 24-hour BPM mean 24-hour,
daytime and nighttime blood pressure were significantly higher in patients with
OSA as compare to non-OSA subjects. The rate of office hypertension (c2Z3.85;
P!0.05),  mean
24-hour
(c2Z4.8;  PZ0.03)  and  nighttime  hypertension
(c2Z5.23; P!0.03) was significantly higher in OSA group, while the frequency
of daytime hypertension was similar in both groups.
Conclusion
According to the office measurement and 24-hour BPM the blood pressure
parameters and prevalence of hypertension were higher in patients with OSA.
According to our data, patients with newly diagnosed acromegaly should be
recommended to undergo polysomnography study in order to detect ones at
higher risk of hypertension development.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP896
EP897
Cabergoline treatment in prolactinoma may not relate with
dyslipidemia
Senay Arikan Durmaz1, Ayse Carlioglu3, Mustafa Rasid Tasdelen2,
Aydin Cifci2, Askin Gungunes1 & Isilay Kalan1
1Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology,
Kirikkale, Turkey;2Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Internal Medicine, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Erzurum Regional Education and
Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, Erzurum, Turkey.
Introduction and aim
The metabolic changes of lipid profiles in prolactinoma treated with cabergoline
are not completely clarified. The aim of this preliminary study is to evaluate
changes of lipid profile in both of patients with functional hyperprolactinemia and
prolactinoma before and after cabergoline treatment.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Materials and methods
Twelve patients with prolactinoma who were treated with cabergoline (mean age
33.8G7.6 years and body mass index (BMI) 27.0G9.6 kg/m2), 30 age- and BMI-
matched  (mean  age  30.0G9.8  years;  BMI  26.8G6.4  kg/m2)  patients  with
functional hyperprolactinemia, and 30 age- and BMI-matched healthy control
subjects (mean age 31.0G7.0 years; BMI 25.2G2.9 kg/m2) were included in this
study. All venous blood samples after 12 hour overnight fasting period were taken
before and after cabergoline treatment. All hormonal and biochemical analysis
were performed by automatic analyzer.
Results
Our findings demonstrated that serum prolactin levels in prolactinoma were
139.9G111.9 ng/ml vs. 23.0G28.2 ng/ml before and after cabergoline treatment,
respectively (PZ0.001). On the other hand, serum mean prolactin levels was
58.3G40.5 ng/ml in hyperprolactinemia group without cabergoline treatment and
16.2G8.3 ng/ml in control group (PZ0.01). Serum mean total cholesterol levels
were found as 181.2G30.0 vs 184.1G26.7 mg/dl respectively, before and after
treatment  in  prolactinoma  group.  Serum  mean  LDL-cholesterol  levels  in
prolactinoma group were 102.8G25.4 vs 104.2G19.9 mg/dl before and after
treatment. Serum mean HDL- cholesterol levels in prolactinoma group were
57.5G11.1 vs 59.1G15.8 mg/dl and serum mean triglyceride levels were 106.9G
46.0 vs. 102.5G47.2 mg/dl before and after treatment, respectively. Before and
after cabergoline treatment, no significantly differences were found between
study groups in terms of serum lipid profiles such as total cholesterol, LDL-
cholesterol,  HDL-cholesterol  and  triglyceride  levels.  In  addition,  all  lipid
parameters in prolactinoma group were not different from both of hyperprolacti-
nemia group and their control group.
Conclusions
According to our preliminary results, we consider that cabergoline therapy does
not impact on serum lipid levels in patients with prolactinoma. This study is still
ongoing.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP897
EP898
Decreased skin capacitance and elasticity may be reversible after
treatment of Cushing’s syndrome
Zuleyha Karaca1, Sedat Tarik Firat1, Murat Borlu2, Fatih Tanriverdi1,
Kursad Unluhizarci1 & Fahrettin Kelestimur1
1Erciyes University Medical School Department of Endocrinology, Kayseri,
Turkey;2Erciyes University Medical School Department of Dermatology,
Kayseri, Turkey.
Background
Acne, stria and decreased skin elasticity are dermatological features of Cushing’s
syndrome (CS). Although it is known that collagen mass in skin is decreased in
CS and glucocorticoids play a role in acneiform skin lesions, the dermatological
findings of CS has not previously been measured by reliable methods.
Objective
The aim of the present study was to measure skin elasticity, capacitance, sebum
content, pH and temperature in CS before and after 12 months of treatment.
Methods
Twenty patients with CS and 11 healthy control subjects were included in the
study. Skin properties were measured on dorsum of both hands by Cutameter,
Corneometer  CM825,  Sebumeter  SM810,  Phmeter  PH900
as  non-invasive
reliable measuring methods. Patients were treated for CS with surgery and they
were reevaluated 12 months after.
Results
The sebum content, temperature and capacitance of the skin were found to be
significantly decreased in patients with CS compared to healthy controls on
dorsum of both hands at baseline. The skin capacitance in CS was found to be
similar to healthy controls after treatment, however the increment was not found
to be significant compared to baseline. The sebum and temperature of the skin did
not show significant changes according to baseline and was still significantly
lower than healthy controls. Although statistically not significant, the elasticity of
the skin was lower in CS than in the controls. The elasticity of the skin was found
to be significantly increased a year after treatment. There was no correlation of
skin elasticity, capacitance, temperature and sebum content of the skin with
morning or midnight cortisol, urinary free cortisol or ACTH levels at baseline.
Conclusion
This study revealed a hypothermic skin surface with decreased sebum secretion
and capacitance and mildly decreased skin elasticity in CS. The decreased
elasticity and capacitance of the skin may increase after treatment of CS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP898
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP899
Surgical Treatment and outcome of TSH-producing pituitary adenoma
Till Burkhardt1, Roman Rotermund1, Nina Sauer2, Jakob Matschke3,
Nils-Ole Schmidt1 & Jorg Flitsch1
1Neurosurgery, UKE, Hamburg, Germany;2Endocrinology, UKE,
Hamburg, Germany;3Neuropathology, UKE, Hamburg, Germany.
Objectives
TSH-producing pituitary adenomas account for 1-2% of all pituitary tumors and
there is debate wether transsphenoidal surgery or medical treatment should be
recommended as first-line treatment. This study summarizes the authors surgical
experience and puts it into context of literature concerning non-surgical treatment
of TSHomas.
Methods
A retrospective analysis of 12 patients including imaging, laboratory testing,
short-term and long-term parameters of remission and overall pituitary function.
Results
12 patients are presented, 3 are male, 9 are female, mean age is 40 years (16-56).
Time from first symptoms to diagnosis was 92.5 months (12-180 months).
Preoperative  blood  draws  revealed  mean  TSH-levels  of
8.07
mU/l  (range
0.95-43.65, S.D. 11.5), mean fT3 of 8.5 pmol/l (range 4.2-17.3, S.D. 3.2) and mean
levels of fT4 of 25.7 pmol/l (range 18.7-33.1 S.D. 4.7). TSH-levels decreased to a
mean of 0.69mU/l (range 0.03-3.018, S.D. 1) on postoperative day one and to
0.64mU/l (range 0.01-3.5, S.D. 1.1) between postoperative days 2 and 5 (table).
Postoperative day 1 levels of fT3 and fT4 were measured at a mean of 3.68pmol/l
(range 2.3-5.7, S.D. 1.2) and 21.6pmol/l (range 15.5-28.5, S.D. 4.1). A further
decrease in fT3 and fT4 levels were observed during days 2 and 5 with fT3
reducing to a mean of 3.1 pmol/l (range 2-5.3, S.D. 0.98) and fT4 levels of 15.3
pmol/l (range 12.3-19.2, S.D. 2) Data on long term development of TSH, fT3 and
fT4 were available for 9 out of 12 patients, showing levels of mean TSH of 1.8
mU/l (0.39-4.45, S.D. 1.16), mean levels of fT3 of 2.6 pmol/l (0.32-5, S.D. 2.0) and
mean levels of fT4 of 16.07 pmol/l (1.7-19.5, S.D. 2). ACTH and cortisol levels
were available in 10 out of 12 patients showing mean ACTH-levels of 6.6 pmol/l
(2.8-12.1, S.D. 3.4) and mean cortisol levels of 356.8 nmol/l (158-893, S.D. 216.8).
Conclusion
We argue that transsphenoidal surgery for TSH-producing adenoma  of the
pituitary should always be considered as the treatment of choice. Even in patients
harboring invasive tumors or giant adenomas remission following surgery is
highly probable. Postoperative hypopituitarism is very unlikely if patients are
referred to centers with high case load of pituitary surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP899
EP900
Impact of the GH-receptor antagonist pegvisomant on mammographic
breast density in postmenopausal acromegalic women
Ammar Muhammad1, Gianluca Ficarra2, Sanne Franck1, Elena Nazarri2,
Alberto Tagliafico2, Sebastian Neggers1, Diego Ferone2 & Federico Gatto2
1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
2University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
Background
Acromegaly is a severe systemic condition characterized by elevated circulating
levels of growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and
increased mortality and morbidity. The role of GH and IGF-I in mammary
hyperplasia is well established and GH/IGF-I elevation has been hypothesized to
favor neoplastic development. We recently demonstrated that premenopausal
females with active acromegaly may display an increased mammographic breast
density (MBD) compared with healthy matched controls. In the present study, we
aimed to evaluate the impact of treatment with the GH-receptor antagonist
pegvisomant (PEGV) on MBD in postmenopausal acromegalic patients.
Patients and Methods
patients
(mean  age  59  yrs)  with  at  least  one  mammogram  available  were
evaluated. A second and a third mammogram was available in 29 and 27 patients.
Clinical  and  biochemical  characteristics  at  the  time  of  the  first  and  last
mammogram were recorded. Mammograms were evaluated using a validated
software (MDEST) which provides a quantitative assessment of MBD on a
percentage scale.
Results
At  first  radiological  evaluation,
12
patients  were  treated  with  long-acting
somatostatin analogues (LA-SSAs) combined with PEGV and 27 with LA-SSAs
alone. MBD was slightly lower in patients treated with LA-SSA and PEGV
compared with patients on SSA monotherapy (0.29G0.15% vs. 0.24G0.09%,
n.s.). Interestingly, MBD significantly decreased in the 7 patients with moderate-
high breast density, which started PEGV treatment after the first radiological
evaluation and performed a second and third mammogram in a 2 yrs time frame
(0.43G0.13% vs. 0.29G0.8% vs. 0.26G0.5%, PZ0.01).
Conclusions
The addition of PEGV to LA-SSA treatment in postmenopausal acromegalic
patients with moderate-high MBD results in a significant decrease of MBD and
could, therefore, reduce the risk of developing malignancy in these patients
exposed to increased risk of breast cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP900
EP901
High burden of illness at baseline in patients with uncontrolled
acromegaly participating in the PAOLA study
Ilan Shimon1,2, Gerald Raverot3, Mihail Coculescu4, Marek Bolanowski5,
Annamaria Colao6, Albert Kandra7, Karina Hermosillo Reséndiz8,
Alberto M Pedroncelli7 & Mônica Gadelha9
1Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Rabin Medical Center, Petah
Tiqva, Israel;2Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Petah
Tiqva, Israel;3Fédération d’Endocrinologie, Groupement Hospitalier Est,
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France;4Academy of Medical Sciences of
Romania, University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Carol Davila’, National
Institute of Endocrinology ‘CI Parhon’, Bucharest, Romania;5Wroclaw
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland;6Università Federico II di Napoli,
Naples, Italy;7Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland;8Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA;9Hospital
Universitário Clementino Fraga Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Background
The Phase III PAOLA study assessed the efficacy and safety of pasireotide LAR
versus continued treatment with octreotide LAR or lanreotide Autogel in patients
with uncontrolled acromegaly. The current analysis investigated overall baseline
characteristics and response rates to pasireotide according to co-morbidities.
Methods
Patients were classified into five groups of co-morbidities related to acromegaly:
glucose- (nZ104), endocrine- (nZ127), lipid-related (nZ56), vascular disorders
(nZ80), and all other acromegaly-related disorders not included in these previous
groups (nZ111). A sixth group consisted of patients without any acromegaly-
related co-morbidity (nZ17). Baseline characteristics and efficacy were based on
the  total  population
(NZ198)  and  patients  receiving  pasireotide
(NZ130),
respectively.
Results
of patients had R1 co-morbidity, while 70%, 49%, and 24% had R2, R3, and
R4 co-morbidities,  respectively.  The  most common co-morbidities  were
endocrine related (64%; eg goitre and hypothyroidism), all other acromegaly
related
(56%;  eg  sleep  apnoea  and  headache),  and  glucose  related
(53%,
eg diabetes mellitus and impaired glucose tolerance), followed by vascular (40%,
eg hypertension), lipid-related (28%, eg dyslipidaemia and hypercholesterolae-
mia), and without any acromegaly-related co-morbidity (9%). Across the five
groups of comorbidities related to acromegaly, mean age (45.8-52.3 years),
baseline insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1; 2.2-3.1! upper limit of normal),
and baseline growth hormone (GH) levels (9.0-12.4 mg/L) were similar. Across
these same groups, pasireotide treatment reduced mean GH and IGF-1 levels from
baseline to week 24 by 26.5-47.5% and 33.2-46.2%, respectively. Response rates
to pasireotide (defined as GH !2.5 mg/L and IGF-1 normalization at week 24)
were similar (18.2-20.6%).
Conclusions
Most patients in the PAOLA study had multiple acromegaly-related co-morbid-
ities at baseline. GH/IGF-1 response to pasireotide treatment was similar between
groups of patients regardless of co-morbidity at baseline. Qualitative analysis of
the effect of each co-morbidity on treatment outcome is ongoing.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP901
EP902
Craniopharyngiomas-35 years of experience in a central hospital’s
Endocrinology Department
Diana Oliveira, Isabel Paiva, Daniela Guelho, Luís Cardoso, Nuno Vicente,
Diana Martins, Adriana Lages, Mara Ventura, Sandra Paiva &
Francisco Carrilho
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department, Coimbra University
and Hospital Center, Coimbra, Portugal.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Craniopharyngiomas are rare epithelial tumors of the sellar and parasellar region,
with high survival rates but with frequent tumor recurrence or persistence.
Methods
Information collection from clinical records and review of the epidemiology,
diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of patients with diagnosis of craniophar-
yngioma followed in an Endocrinology Department between 1980 and 2015.
Statistical analysis using SPSS v. 22.0.
Results
Forty patients were included, 50% were male. Median age by diagnosis was 36
years
(minimum  6,  maximum  70).  In  respect  to  clinical  manifestations  at
diagnosis, visual alterations were present in 77.5% (nZ31) and headache in
72.5% (nZ29). The majority of the tumors had sellar and suprasellar involvement
(77.5%); cystic component was detected in 89.7% and calcifications in 47.5%.
Initial surgical approach was transcranial in 74.4%, transsphenoidal in 25.6%.
From the available neuropathology results (nZ29), 79.3% were adamantinoma-
tous and 20.7% papillary. The average number of surgical interventions per
patient was 2.03 (minimum 1, maximum 7). Eight patients (20.0%) were treated
with radiotherapy. In the last neuroimaging evaluation, 47.5% of patients had
residual tumor. Panhypopituitarism was detected in 6/30 patients preoperatively
and in 23/39 in follow-up. All the isolated anterior pituitary deficits were also
more  frequent  in  follow-up.  Weight  gain  was  seen  in
83.9%  of  patients.
Prevalence of diabetes Mellitus, arterial hypertension and dyslipidemia also
increased. Average follow-up time was 15.5 (G10) years. Six patients died, of
whom four had been diagnosed between 6 and 14 years of age.
Conclusion
Despite  the  evolution  in  neurosurgical  technique  and  the  possibility  of
radiotherapy, craniopharyngiomas are still associated with high rates of tumor
persistence and substantial morbidity. Optimization of the treatment of any
endocrine and metabolic sequelae of the disease is essential in the management
of these patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP902
EP903
Acromegalic cardiomyopathy: echocardiographic and CMR analysis
Alvise Casara1, Francesca Dassie1, Marialberta Battocchio1,
Matteo Parolin1, Chiara Martini1, Eugenio De Carlo1, Roberto Mioni1,
Giulia Famoso2, Francesco Tona2, Francesco Fallo1, Roberto Vettor1,
Francesco Corbetti3 & Pietro Maffei1
1Department of Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy;2Department of
Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of PAdua, Padua,
Italy;3Cardiac magnetic resonance unit, Albignasego, Italy.
Introduction
Acromegalic cardiomyopathy is characterized by myocardial hypertrophy and
interstitial myocardial fibrosis at biopsy. We studied left ventricular hypertrophy -
LVH- through echocardiography (-ECHO- 2-D standard echocardiography and
Doppler analysis) and cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) analysis. Myocardial
fibrosis was studied with late enhancement technique (LE) and extracellular
volume technique (ECV) at CMR.
Methods
25 patients -pts- (13 males) with an average age of 49.24G11.96 yy, mean IGF-1
324(186-626) ug/L, 17pts with active disease, 9 pts had a newly diagnosed
disease. Results of the CMR (on 24 pts) were compared with those of 20 controls -
CTR- matched for sex and age.
Results
On ECHO: 10pts reported LVH (mean left ventricular mass index LVMiZ
118.83G26.32 g/m2), 17 pts had first grade diastolic dysfunction (E/AZ0.81G
0.3). There was no correlation between the echocardiography data and IGF-1. On
CMR: 5pts had LVH (median LVMiZ64.2g/m2). Pts with LVH had higher IGF-1
levels than pts without LVH (MedianZ801 mg/l vs 267 mg/l; PZ0.01); pts with
active disease had higher LVMi values than non-active pts (MedianZ70.2 g/m2
vs 61g/m2; PZ0.007); there was a significant correlation between IGF-1 and
LVMi (rZ0.63; P!0.05). LE was found in 9 pts. Pts’s ECV was significantly
elevated in comparison to CTR (ptsZ24.05G3.2% vs CTRZ19.99G1.58%
P!0.0001). LVMi at CMR had  a significant  correlation  with  LVMi at
echocardiography (rZ0.5, P!0.05).
Conclusions
This study confirms that LVH and diastolic dysfunction are key features of
acromegalic cardiomyopathy. Both macroscopic (LE) and interstitial fibrosis
(ECV) are common findings in acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP903
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP904
Subarachnoid haemorrhage results in poor quality of life independent
of pituitary hormone concentrations
Zainab Nagras1, Marianne Klose1, Lars Poulsgaard2, Michael Kosteljanetz2,
Jannick Brennum2 & Ulla Feldt-Rasmussen1
1Department of Medical Endocrinology, Copenhagen University Hospital
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark;2Department of Neurosurgery,
Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction
Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) is associated with a mortality rate of 30% and
the survivors face significant morbidity including fatigue, isolation, depression
and sleep disorders; factors affecting general health related quality of life (QoL).
QoL is also known to be decreased in pituitary-hypothalamic insufficiency and
tends to improve after treatment. SAH has been suggested to be a common cause
of hypopituitarism by some whereas not by others. We aimed to investigate if
aneurismal SAH results in changes in QoL and if these changes relate to the
concentrations of pituitary hormones.
Methods
We performed a cross-sectional evaluation including a subgroup with prospective
follow-up. QoL measurements were performed at 12 months post-SAH in 62
patients with SAH and 30 healthy controls. Twenty-six of the patients were
followed prospectively (3-, 6-, and 12-months) post-SAH. Full anterior pituitary
assessments,  including  stimulation  tests  for  growth  hormone  and  adrenal
insufficiencies, were performed on collected blood samples at all time points.
QoL evaluation was assessed by using two generic questionnaires, the euroQoL-
5D (EQ-5D) and Nottingham Health Profile (NHP) and one specific of growth
hormone deficiency (GHD), the Quality of Life Assessment of Growth Hormone
Deficiency in Adults (QoL-AGHDA).
Results
Post-SAH patients scored significantly lower on all QoL questionnaires (NHP,
EQ-5D and QoL-AGHDA) when compared to controls 12 months post-SAH (all
patients), as well as at 3-, 6-, and 12 months (prospective subgroup). Pituitary
hormone levels at 12 months were found to be within the normal range. No
correlations between QoL measurements and pituitary hormone levels were
found, and there were no significant differences in QoL between patients with the
lowest and highest hormone levels, respectively (PO0.08 for all comparisons).
Conclusion
SAH  is  associated  with  long  term  worsened  QoL,  but  it  appears  to  be
independent of pituitary hormone concentration, and thus rather a consequence
of the SAH per se.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP904
EP905
Incidental finding of “Empty Sella” and prevalence of endocrine
disturbances - a systematic review
Mareike Stieg, Matthias Auer, Gunter K Stalla & Anna Kopczak
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.
Neuroimaging techniques have improved over the last years; hence an “empty
sella” is more often incidentally diagnosed. The term “empty sella” describes a
missing pituitary gland in the sella turcica. Up to now, it is not known if routine
endocrine assessment is necessary in patients with primary empty sella syndrome
(PES) without clinical suspicion or history of neuroendocrine disorders.
We performed a systematic literature research using the search term “empty sella“
in the databases PubMed/MEDLINE and Web of Science. Studies published
between 1995 and 2015 were included according to the PRISMA four-phase flow
diagram. A cross-sectional quality appraisal tool was used to assess quality of
studies. Only studies in which endocrine diagnostics were performed properly
according to published guidelines were included into our analysis.
A total of 615 studies were identified. We excluded all reviews, pediatric studies,
animal studies and case reports
(less than nZ3 patients). Only
25 studies
addressed the question of prevalence of neuroendocrine disturbances in PES; only
4 studies referred to an incidentally diagnosed PES. The pooled prevalence rate of
hypopituitarism was 50.5%G21.6%. Isolated pituitary insufficiency was less
frequent than impairment of two or more pituitary hormonal axes (22.0%G13.2%
vs.
31.5G20.5%). Growth hormone deficiency was reported to be the most
frequent disorder irrespective of grade of empty sella (partial or complete) or
number of pituitary deficiencies. Reported prevalence of ACTH-insufficiency
varied from 9 to 37.5%. Panhypopituitarism seems to be rare (reported prevalence
from 0% up to 19%); likewise hyperprolactinemia (mean prevalence 12.9%G
6.3%) or diabetes insipidus (reported prevalence from 0% to 5%). Overall, gender
and BMI seem to be associated with the prevalence of PES, as 77.6%G11.4% of
all patients were female and the mean reported BMI was 29.1G0.3 kg/m2.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Data on an incidentally diagnosed empty sella in asymptomatic patients are
scarce. Based on our data and on expert opinion, we recommend performing
routine neuroendocrine diagnostic in patients with an incidental finding of “empty
sella”.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP905
EP906
Quality of life in patients with acromegaly and the effect of somatostatin
analogues
Dimitrios Kaldrymidis1, Georgios Papadakis2, Georgios Tsakonas2,
Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou3, Philippos Kaldrymidis1,
Melpomeni Peppa4, Paraskevi Roussou1 & Evanthia Diamanti-Kandarakis1
13rd Department of Internal Medicine, University of Athens, Sotiria General
Hospital, Athens, Greece;2Department of Endocrinology, Metaxa Antic-
ancer Hospital, Athens, Pireaus, Greece;3Department of Endocrinology,
Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece;4Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Athens, Attikon Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Objective
Quality of life is currently considered a major factor in the assessment of disease
outcome. The aim was to assess quality of life in acromegaly and the effect of
somatostatin analogues on it.
Design
This study included 101 patients with acromegaly, mean age 59.51G1.35 years
(mean G S.E.M.), with a disease duration of 12.88G0.96 years. All subjects
completed the Acromegaly Quality of Life Questionnaire (AcroQoL) which is a
disease-specific  questionnaire  for  patients  with  acromegaly.  It  contains
22
questions with five possible responses. Each response is scored from 1 to 5 and the
maximum score is 110 whereas the minimum score is 22. A group of 27 patients
were treated initially with a somatostatin analogue s.c. in 3 divided daily doses
and subsequently long acting somatostatin analogues, whereas 72 were treated
with long acting somatostatin analogues as a primary medical treatment.
Results
Quality of life as assessed by AcroQol was found to be impaired in acromegaly.
The administration of somatostatin analogues was found to improve quality of life
in acromegaly. Acromegalics showed a mean total AcroQoL score of 53.22G
1.87
(mean G S.E.M.) before treatment. Total AcroQol after treatment was
73.59G2.97 for patients who initially received somatostatin analogues 3 times
daily (nZ27), and 86.15G1.37 for all the patients who received long acting
somatostatin analogues once per 28 days (27 patients who first received short
acting and 72 patients who received long acting somatostatin analogues as a
primary treatment) (P!0.001)
Conclusions
Quality of life is impaired in acromegaly. The administration of somatostatin
analogues  is  related  with  better  quality  of  life.  Long  acting  somatostatin
analogues improve quality of life more than short acting somatostatin analogues.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP906
EP907
Serum N-terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide level in patients with
prolactinoma who were treated with caborgoline
Mustafa Rasid Tasdelen1, Senay Arikan Durmaz2, Nesligul Yildirim3 &
Eyup Koc4
1Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, kirikkale, Turkey;2Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Endocrinology, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Kirikkale University
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Kirikkale, Turkey;
4Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Nephrology,
Kirikkale, Turkey.
Introduction and aim
Cabergoline, a long-lasting dopamine-agonist, is generally considered to be the
safety drug for the treatment of prolactinoma. But, use of long time and high dose
cabergoline may be a cause of cardiac valvulopathy in patient with prolactinoma.
In present study, we aim to determine serum N-terminal probrain natriuretic
peptide levels in patients with prolactinoma who were treated with cabergoline.
Materials and methods
Thirty patients with prolactinoma who applied to our endocrinology outpatient
clinic (mean age 33.4G8.5 years and body mass index (BMI): 28.1G7.8 kg/m2),
30 age- and BMI matched (mean age 30.0G9.8 years; BMI: 26.8G6.4 kg/m2)
patients  who  were  determined  another  cause  of  hyperprolactinemia  except
prolactinoma, and age- and BMI matched healthy individuals (mean age 31.0G
7.0
years;  BMI:
25.2G2.9  kg/m2  were  included  in  the  study.  Cumulative
cabergoline dose was calculated in patients with prolactinoma who have received
prior cabergoline therapy. Anthropometric measurements were performed. Blood
pressure was measured in accordance with its thecnic. Serum samples for NT-pro
BNP levels were stored K208 C. All biochemical and hormonal analysis were
performed by automatic analyzer.
Results
We found that serum NT-pro BNP levels were not significantly different between
study groups (63.9G39.8 pg/ml in prolactinoma group, 47.3G31.2 pg/ml in
hyperprolactinemia group and 57.2G28.3 pg/ml in control group, PZ0.160).
Mean cumulative cabergoline dose (CCD) were calculated as 218.1G252.5
(range 52-1248 mg). However, we did not determine any correlations between
serum NT-pro BNP levels and cumulative cabergoline dose, and between serum
NT-pro BNP and prolactine levels. There was only a positive correlation between
CCD and systolic blood tension (rZ0.213, PZ0.044).
Conclusions
According to our findings, cabergoline  treatment does not influence serum
NT-pro BNP levels in prolactinoma patients. Advanced studies which were
included more patients with prolactinoma need to clarified this topic.
Keywords: Prolactinoma, cabergoline, NT-proBNP.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP907
EP908
Vitamin D status of adults with growth hormone deficiency
Ivayla Uzunova1, Georgi Kirilov1, Sabina Zacharieva1 &
Krassimir Kalinov2
1Clinical Centre of Endocrinology, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia,
Bulgaria;2New Bulgarian University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Introduction
Vitamin D and growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 (GH/IGF-1) axis are
reported to interplay at both endocrine and paracrine levels, with a positive
correlation between IGF-1 and 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) in healthy
subjects. Hyposomatotropism is among the conditions predisposing to lower
vitamin D status due to several direct and indirect mechanisms. Thus, the aim of
our study was to evaluate vitamin D status in a representative sample of adults
with GH deficiency (GHD) and to investigate the association between serum
25(OH)D and age, gender and onset of hyposomatotropism.
Methods
This cross-sectional study included 129 adults (aged 42.1G16.6 years, 70 males)
diagnosed with GHD (41.9% with childhood-onset GHD (COGHD)) in the
Clinical Centre of Endocrinology in Sofia, Bulgaria. Total serum 25(OH)D was
the vitamin D metabolite used to assess vitamin D status and was measured by
electro-chemiluminescence binding assay. Vitamin D status and GHD were
defined  according  to  the  Endocrine  Society  Clinical  Practice  Guideline
recommendations.
Results
Major part of the patients was diagnosed with vitamin D deficiency (79.1%,
nZ102) and another 14.7% (nZ19) had vitamin D insufficiency. 25(OH)D levels
O30 ng/ml were found in only 6.2% (nZ8) of the subjects. Mean 25(OH)D
levels (15.1G7.6 ng/ml) did not differ between men and women (15.7G7.2 vs.
14.5G8.1 ng/ml, PZ0.387) and correlated negatively and weakly with age
(rZK0.256;  PZ0.003).  In  the  AOGHD  subgroup,  however,  mean  serum
25(OH)D was significantly lower compared with COGHD participants (14.0G
7.2 vs.16.8G8.0 ng/ml, PZ0.039).
Conclusion
Data from our study demonstrated considerably high prevalence of hypovitami-
nosis D in GHD adults, with lower 25(OH)D concentrations among the subgroup
with AOGHD. Therefore, 25(OH)D testing is highly recommended in patients
with  hyposomatotropism.  Normalization of  vitamin D status might have
beneficial effects in GHD subjects, especially considering the additive effects
of vitamin D and GH replacement.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP908
EP909
Renal function in acromegaly - experience from a portuguese centre
Carlos Tavares Bello, Ricardo Fonseca, Francisco Sousa Santos,
Ricardo Capita˜o, João Sequeira Duarte & Carlos Vasconcelos
Hospital de Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
The Nephron is a known target organ of the Growth Hormone/Insulin-like
factor-1 axis. They influence glomerular and tubular function having an important
physiological role in water and electrolyte balance, especially in Acromegaly.
The aim of the study was to investigate renal function in acromegalic patients
during active disease and remission and evaluate hormonal impact on renal
function markers.
Methods
A retrospective, longitudinal, observational analysis was performed regarding 52
acromegalic patients. Variables such as creatinine, glomerular filtration rate
(GFR),  IGF1/GH  and  the  remainder  pituitary  hormones  were  evaluated.
Descriptive statistical methods were used and the results are presented as mean
and standard deviation. Pearson correlations and student T-test were used to
analyze numerical data.
Results
52 acromegalic patients (69.2% females) with a mean age of 57 years were
eligible to the study. The underlying etiology was a pituitary macroadenoma in
78.9% and 19.2% were treated with Radiotherapy. Disease control was achieved
in
71.2%. Statistical significant correlations were found between IGF-1 and
creatinine and eGFR (P 0.001 and 0.003 respectively). Patients in remission had a
lower mean eGFR (79 vs 89 mL/min/1.73 m2). Degree of elevation of IGF1 from
the upper normal range (expressed in %) was correlated with eGFR, creatinine
and metabolic parameters (Fasting blood glucose and glycated hemoglobin) with
statistical significance.
Conclusion
The  current  study  demonstrates  consistently  a  possible  positive  correlation
between IGF1/GH axis and renal function markers. Despite being a retrospective
study, the sample size may further support the relevance of the GH/IGF1-renal
axis in Acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP909
EP910
High mean platelet volume in prolactinoma treated with cabergoline
Senay Arikan Durmaz1, Mustafa Rasid Tasdelen2, Ayse Carlioglu3,
Aydin Cifci2 & Askin Gungunes1
1Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology,
Kirikkale, Turkey;2Kirikkale University Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Internal Medicine, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Erzurum Regional Education and
Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, Erzurum, Turkey.
Introduction and aim
Mean platelet volume (MPV) is a new important indicator of platelet activity in
atherosclerosis.  Elevated  MPV  is  associated  with  the  presence  of  more
metabolically active platelets. The aim of our study is to evaluate whether
change of MPV value is associated with cabergoline treatment in patients with
prolactinoma.
Materials and methods
Thirty patients with prolactinoma (mean age 33.4G8.5 years and body mass
index (BMI): 28.1G7.8 kg/m2), and 30 age- and BMI matched healthy control
subjects (mean age 31.0G7.0 years; BMI: 25.2G2.9 kg/m2 were recruited in our
study. Cumulative cabergoline (CCD) dose was calculated. The MPV value was
evaluated before and after cabergoline therapy and was compared to control
group. Anthropometric measurements were performed. Patients have hemato-
logical  and  other  endocrinologic  diseases  including  diabetes  mellitus  were
excluded from the study. All complete blood count, biochemical and hormonal
analysis were performed by automatic analyzer.
Results
According to our findings, serum prolactin levels in prolactinoma before and after
the cabergoline treatment were significantly different (128.0G99.7 vs 35.5G39.5
ng/ml,  PZ0.0001,  respectively).  Mean  cumulative  cabergoline  dose  were
calculated as 218.1G252.5 mg. We found that the mean pre-treatment MPV
values in prolactinoma group were lower than post-treatment MPV values (8.9G
0.8 and 9.6G0.8 fL, PZ0.0001, respectively) and lower than control group
(8.9G0.8 and 9.8G0.9 fL, PZ0.0001, respectively). There was no correlation
both between post-treatment MPV and CCD. Moreover, there were not any
relationships  between  MPV  and  both  prolactin  levels  before  and  after  the
treatment.
Conclusions
The  cabergoline  treatment  in  prolactinoma  may  relate  high  MPV  value
independent to cumulative cabergoline dose and prolactine levels. The future
study need to clarify this increment of MPV during low dose cabergoline therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP910
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP911
Serum cortisol in the early post operative period after transphenoidal
surgery to predict adrenal insufficiency
Inmaculada Gonzalez-Molero1, Monserrat Gonzalo-Marin1,
Silvia Maraver Selfa3, Laura Gonzalez Garcia2, Rida Naghib1,
Stella Gonzalez Romero1, Juan García Arnes4, Miguel Angel Arraez2 &
Francisco Tinahones1,3
1Regional Universitary Hospital, Endocrinology Department, Málaga,
Spain;2Regional Universitary Hospital, Neurosurgery Department, Málaga,
Spain;3Virgen de la Victoria Hospital, Endocrinology Department, Málaga,
Spain;4Malaga University, Málaga, Spain.
Adrenal insufficiency is a common complication of transsphenoidal surgery
(TSS) for pituitary adenoma. It is very important to identify patients requiring
glucocorticoid replacement, minimising risks of adrenal insufficiency.
Aim
To  assess  the performance  of  early
(38
day) post-TSS  08:00 a.m. cortisol
measurement to detect and exclude secondary adrenal insufficiency.
Methods
We selected patients undergoing TSS in our hospital during 12 months and
performed a 38 day postoperative 08:00 a.m. cortisol measurement and cortisolG
Synachten 6 months post-surgery. All patients received perioperative glucocorti-
coid replacement (First and second days postsurgery) unless basal cortisol was O
10 microg/dl and cortisol after Synachten O23 microg/dl previous to surgery. We
excluded patients with previous diagnosed and treated adrenal insuficiency. In
patients  with
38
day  cortisol  lower  than
10
microg/dl  we  maintained
glucocorticoid treatment until reevaluation with cortisol/Synachten 6 months
post-surgery.In  patients  with
38
day  cortisol  higher  than
10
microg/dl
glucocorticoids were discontinued.
Results
Data were reviewed from 20 patients (9 males, mean age 52.8 years), 18 with
macroadenomas, 8 patients with cushing disease. Patients with adenomas no
cushing:  all  patients  with
38
day  cortisol  O15
microg/dl  had  normal
cortisol/Synachten 6 months post-surgery. 2 patients with 38 day cortisol between
10 and 15 microg/dl had adrenal insufficiency 6 months postsurgery. 1 patient
with 38 day cortisol!10 microg/dl mantained adrenal insuficiency 6 months
postsurgery. Cushing disease: all patients with 38 day cortisol O10 microg/dl had
not adrenal insuficiency 6 months postsurgery, all except one with recurrence. All
patients with 38 day cortisol !10 microg/dl had not recurrences, all except one
with adrenal insufficiency.
Conclusion
A 38 day post-TSS cortisol O15 microg/dl is a safe cutt off to discarge adrenal
insufficiency. In cushing disease, a level !10 microg/dl predict a low likelihood
of recurrences.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP911
EP912
A neurosarcoidosis case with pituitary stalk involvement manifesting as
hypogonadism and hyperprolactinemia
Asli Nar, Ozlem Turhan Iyidir, Sevde Nur Firat & Neslihan Bascil Tutuncu
Baskent University School of Medicine, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Ankara, Ankara, Turkey.
Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disease of unknown cause. The
prevalence of neurosarcoidosis is about 5-15%. Hypothalamo-pituitary sarcoi-
dosis is even rarer (!1% of cases evaluated for sellar and stalk lesions).
Case Report
A 33-year-old man presented to urology department with erectile dysfunction
which  started  six  months  ago.  Hormonal  evaluation  revealed  gonadotropin
deficiency and hyperprolactinemia (Total testosterone: 30.5 ng/dl, LH: 2 mIU/ml,
FSH: 1.9 mIU/ml, PRL: 32.2 ng/ml). His sellar MRI showed uniformly thickened
pituitary stalk and gadolinium-enhancement of leptomeninges, posterior limb of
internal capsule, base of third ventricle, suprasellar- perioptic regions, cerebellar
hemispheres and pineal gland.
His medical history uncovered that he was diagnosed as pulmonary sarcoidosis
four years ago for which he didn’t receive any specific therapy and was lost
of follow-up. He was diagnosed with deep venous thrombosis of lower extremity
4 months ago. Patient was put on anticoagulation therapy.
Bilateral hilar and mediastinal adenopathy was detected on thorax CT. The
endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration of hilar lymph
node  showed  noncaseating  granulomas  consistent  with  sarcoidosis.  These
findings  suggested  a  diagnosis  of  neurosarcoidosis  with  pituitary  stalk
involvement. This patient was treated with an initial dose of methylprednisolon
(1 mg/kg/day) which was then tapered and azathioprine (150 mg/day) was added
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
two months later because of partial response. Testosterone replacement was also
initiated. MRI abnormalities regressed partially after
6 months of treatment
accompanied by prolactin normalisation without any change in gonadotropin
deficiency.
Conclusion
The pituitary involvement is usually associated with severity of sarcoidosis and
hypogonadism is the most frequent manifestation. Sarcoidosis is also significantly
associated with thrombosis risk as our case. Glucocorticoid and immunosup-
pressive therapy may improve MRI findings but effect on hormonal dysfunction
seems  to  be  limited.  Physicians  should  be  aware  of  hypothalamo-pituitary
involvement of sarcoidosis since earyl treatment may rescue pituitary functions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP912
EP913
An attempt to prepare local Guidelines for Management of Syndrome of
Inappropriate ADH Secretion (SIADH) in a District General Hospital
in the UK
Avraneel Talapatra1, Ian O’Connell2 & Indrajit Talapatra2
1Manchester Medical School, Manchester, UK;2Royal Albert Edward
Infirmary, Wigan, UK.
Aim
To establish the local Guidelines for management of SIADH.
Methods
The European and NIH Guidelines are considered.
Discussion
Diagnosis: Patients admitted with hyponatraemia are first assessed clinically for
their hydration status. Those who are euvolaemic should have their urine sodium
checked (if !30 mmol/l, hypothyroidism is suspected and if O30 mmol/l either
SIADH or Addison’s disease is suspected). Hypothyroidism and Addison’s
disease are first excluded biochemically. The diagnosis is established with serum
sodium
!130  mmol/l,  serum  osmolality  of
!275  mOsmol/kg  and  urine
osmolality of O100 mOsmol/kg, with normal renal function and the patient on no
diuretic.
Management: 1) Fluid restriction to around 750 ml daily. 2) Investigation and
treatment of cause (CXR, CT Thorax, Abdomen and Pelvis, CT head and stopping
drugs like diuretics, antidepressants and antipsychotics, if possible).
3) Oral
Tolvaptan (vasopressin receptor-2 antagonist) 7.5-15 mg can be initiated daily as
inpatient. Plasma sodium is monitored at 6, 12, 24 and 48 hours and thereafter
daily. Free fluid intake is recommended when on Tolvaptan. 4) Demeclocycline
600-1200 mg/day (if available). Renal function should be monitored. 5) Urea in
dosages of 10-40 g/day causes osmotic diuresis and enhanced water excretion.
This form of treatment is cost effective and corrects hyponatremia slowly, by 2-3
mmol/l/day. 6) In acute emergencies (on ITU): 3% hypertonic saline is to be used
at the dose of 150 ml over 20 minutes and can be repeated according to 2014
European Guidelines. The infusion should stop when the symptoms improve or
the serum sodium increases 10 mmol/l in total or its concentration reaches 130
mmol/l, whichever occurs first. The combination of intravenous saline and a loop
diuretic may sometimes be helpful.
Conclusion
Plasma sodium rise should not exceed 10 mmol/l/day and 18 mmol/l in 48 hours.
In refractory cases,  haemodialysis, CVVH and SLEDD  may  be helpful in
specialist centres.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP913
EP914
The association between adenoma size classification and the hormone
hypersecretion in acromegaly
Luana F Soares, Giovana Outuki, Natasha G Ludwig, Daniele R Miksza,
Gracielle R Fiorenzano, Alexandro Marcio S Mattos, Alexandre J F Carrilho
& Tânia L Mazzuco
Serviço de Endocrinologia - Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Londrina -
PR, Brazil.
Introduction
Acromegaly is a chronic disease caused by growth hormone (GH) oversecretion.
A pituitary macroadenoma is found in mostly of cases, but the secretion pattern
of GH and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) and the natural history of
somatotropinomas are heterogeneous. The objective of the present study was to
evaluate the relationship between tumor size, GH and IGF-1 levels in patients
diagnosed with acromegaly.
Methods
A cross-sectional, observational, descriptive study was carried out in acromegaly
patients (nZ25) attending our Neuroendocrinology Outpatient Clinic at the local
university hospital. Patients’ anthropometric data, biochemical investigations and
adenoma size by MRI at diagnosis were recorded. Basal GH and IGF-1 blood levels
(chemiluminescent immunometric assays) were obtained; IGF-1 relative to the
upper limit of the normal range (IGF-1_ULN) and the mean standard deviation
scores (IGF-1_SDS) were calculated from each patient. ROC curves analysis were
performed to determine the discriminative ability of GH, IGF-1, IGF-1_ULN or
IGF-1_SDS in predicting the presence of a GH-secreting Macroadenoma (R10
mm). The results were expressed as sensitivity (S) and specificity (Sp).
Results
Based  on  the  tumor  size  MRI  classification,
76%  of  the  tumors  were
macroadenomas  (1.85G1.08  cm  maximal  diameter;  meanGS.D.).  The  bio-
chemical variable IGF-1 exhibited the highest area under the curve (AUCZ0.88,
P!0.01) with a cut-off point of 703.6 ng/ml (SZ88%; SPZ83%). IGF-1_mean
and IGF-1_ULN presented cut off of 4.2 and 2.8, respectively with identical AUC
values (0.80); PZ0.03, SZ82%, SPZ83%. GH level’s cut-off was 4.520 ng/ml
(AUC 0.73, PZ0.11; SZ94.12%; SPZ50%). The most specific cut-off value
for IGF-1 to discriminate between micro and macroadenomas was 1681 ng/ml
(SPZ100%).
Conclusion
The basal GH level could not discriminate adenoma sizes, while IGF-1 values
were able to indicate the presence of macroadenoma. The absolute IGF-1 blood
concentration was more effective than relative values.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP914
EP915
Prolactin measurements improve the diagnostic accuracy of inferior
petrosal sinus sampling
Meliha Melin Uygur, Mehmet Yasar, Oguzhan Deyneli & Dilek
Gogas Yavuz
Department of Endcorinology and Metabolism Marmara University School
of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling for ACTH is the current gold standard test for the
differentiation of pituitary Cushing disease from the ectopic ACTH syndrome.
Early  studies  with  İPSS  reported  a  diagnostic  sensitive  and  specificity
approaching 100%, additional experience has shown a false negative rate of
1-10%. This has been due to either technical problem with unsuccessful petrosal
sinus  catheterization  or  anomalous  venous  drainage  of  the  pituitary.  The
measurement of other anterior pituitary hormones may be useful during İPSS
to improve the accuracy of the procedure.
Objective
The aim of the study is to increase the accuracy of the inferior petrosal sinus
sampling procedure and reduce the false negative rate through the addition of
prolactin as a marker of pituitary venous outflow as well as validate this adjunct to
the test process.
Method
İn this retrospective cohort study, we reviewed 33 patients who had undergone
IPSS for the investigation of ACTH dependent hypercortisolism at Marmara
university hospital between 2011-2015. Plasma ACTH and Prolactin levels were
measured  both  centrally  and  peripherally.  The  normalized  ACTH/prolactin
inferior petrosal sinus/peripheral ratio was then calculated to asses the accuracy of
the sampling procedure.
Results
Thirty-three patients with confirmed ACTH dependent cortisol excess underwent
investigation with İPSS. Thirty-two patients initially had a positive İPSS result
(i.e. a basal central/peripheral ACTH ratioO2, and O3 post CRH). When the
corrected prolactin data were used, one patient was additionally found to have
positive result suggestive of pituitary Cushing’s. The prolactin normalized ACTH
IPS/peripheral ratios were all O0.8 in patients proven Cushing’s disease.
Conclusion
Normalizing  the  İPS/peripheral  ratios  with  prolactin  helps  to  improve  the
accuracy of the results and reduces the false negative rate.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP915
EP916
Acromegaly: is there a need for colorectal cancer screening?
Yawen Wang, Stefanie Hammersen & Dag Moskopp
Neurosurgery Department, Berlin, Germany.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Objective
Acromegaly is characterized by chronic hypersecretion of growth hormone (GH)
with increased concentration of IGF-1. There have been controversial debates
over the question whether elevated GH levels indicate high risk of developing
colorectal neoplasm. There is no clear guideline indicating the need for colorectal
cancer screening for acromegalics. We evaluated the colonoscopic findings in our
series  of  patients  to  analyze  the  prevalence  of  risk.  Should  patients  with
acromegaly undergo screening for colorectal cancer?
Methods
Full-length colonoscopy was performed on 24 patients within one week after
transsphenoidal surgery. The study includes 13 male and 11 female aged 27-62
years. We analyzed the colonoscopic findings - taking histological, hormonal and
clinical data into account.
Results
All of the patients were asymptomatic prior to colonoscopy. None of the patients
had a positive family history of colorectal cancer. 3 patients showed normal
findings,
3 patients  were  diagnosed  with  diverticulosis,
2 patients  showed
inflammatory lesions, 1 patient showed parasite infestation.
8 patients were
detected with multiple polyps. 7 patients showed premalignant adenomas. In this
respect IGF-1 levels and duration of disease were similar to those with no
precancerous lesions. Mean time between symptom onset and diagnosis was
estimated as 10 years.
Conclusion
In our series we could detect a high prevalence of premalignant tubulovillous
adenomas (7/24) and hyperplastic polyps (8/24) in patients with acromegaly. The
results suggest the necessity for routine colorectal cancer screening in this group
of patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP916
EP917
The role of p16 and MDM2 gene polymorphisms in tumorigenesis and
characteristics of prolactinoma
Seda Turgut1, Muzaffer Ilhan2, Saime Turan3, Ozcan Karaman1,
Ilhan Yaylim3, Ozlem Kucukhuseyin3 & Ertugrul Tasan1
1
Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, Turkey;2Umraniye Training and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;3The Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Prolactinomas are thought to arise from the proliferation of a mutated pituitary
stem cell which is subjected to the growth stimuli of several permissive factors,
although the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying the tumorigenesis still remain
unclear. The present study aimed to investigate the role of p16 (540C/G and
580C/T) and MDM2 (SNP309T/G) gene polymorphisms in tumorigenesis
and characteristics of prolactinoma.
Methods/Design
74 patients with prolactinoma and age- and gender-matched healthy subjects were
enrolled in the study. Serum prolactin levels were measured by enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples then
p16 and MDM2 polymorphisms were determined by polymerase chain reaction-
restriction fragment polymorphism and agarose gel electrophoresis.
Results
p16  540C/G  genotype  distribution  was  found  as  CC:66.2%,  CG:28.4%,
GG:5.4%;  p16
580C/T  genotype  distribution  was  found  as  CC:82.4%,
CT:17.6%, TT:0% and MDM2 genotype distribution was found as TT:31.1%,
TG:47.3%, GG:21.6% in patients with prolactinoma. Tumor diameter before
treatment was correlated with prolactin levels before treatment and percentage of
prolactin  decrease  with  treatment
(P!0.001  rZ0.719,  PZ0.034  rZ0.256,
respectively). Tumor diameter after treatment was correlated with prolactin levels
(P!0.001 rZ0.569). CC genotype (homozygote wild type) frequency is higher
without  statistical  significance  in  both  p16
540C/G  and  p16  580C/T
polymorphisms  among  prolactinoma  patients.  The  number  of  patients  with
tumor size decreased more than 50% in homozygous genotype (TTCGG) carriers
of MDM2 SNP309T/G is significantly higher than in heterozygous genotype
(TG) carriers (PZ0.003, OR: 0.18, CI: 0.06-0.58).
Conclusion
This study showed that p16 and MDM2 polymorphisms do not play an important
role in tumorigenesis, but some genotypes of these polymorphisms could be
associated with follow-up characteristics of prolactinoma. Further studies are
needed to clarify the underlying mechanisms of the tumorigenesis in order to
define prognostic factors and facilitate appropriate treatment choices for patients
with prolactinoma.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP917
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP918
Clinical proofs for necessity of macroprolactinemia screening
Irena Ilovayskaya1, Alexander Dreval1, Yulia Krivosheeva1 &
Tatiana Osipova2
1Moscow Regional Research & Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russia;
2Laboratory EFIS, Moscow, Russia.
Prevalence of macroprolactin in serum (O40%) can be a cause of asymptomatic
hyperprolactinemia. However, there is still lack of evidence how to manage with
symptomatic patients with macroprolactinemia.
We analyzed clinical data and monomeric prolactin levels in 85 women of
reproductive age with hyperprolactinemia: NonTumor hyperprolactinemia (NT,
nZ31), MIcroadenomas (MI, nZ32), MAcroadenomas (MA, nZ22). Prolactin
levels 1716 [1150; 2700] mIU/l; 2974 [1190; 3665] mIU/l and 3546 [1312;
48209] mIU/l, accordingly.
Prevalence of macroprolactin in serum was found in 16/31 (51.6%) NT, 9/32
(28.1%) MI, and 2/22 (9%) MA (a relative amount macroprolactin was 79
[75;
88]
%).  Among  patients  with  macroprolactinemia  normal  levels  of
monomeric prolactin were found in 10/16 NT, 4/9 MI and 1/2 MA; all patients
with normal monomeric prolactin levels had total prolactin levels !5000 mIU/l;
only 6 NT and 4 MI were asymptomatic, other patients had menstrual irregularities
and/or infertility and non-hyperprolactinemic reasons for these clinical symptoms
were found after investigations.
Biological activity of hyperprolactinemic sera (as a proliferative response of Nb2
rat lymphoma cells) was evaluated in vitro in 8 patients with predominance of
monomeric prolactin and in 5 patients with macroprolactiemia. Ratio ‘Prolactin
Immunoreactivity/Prolactin Bioactivity’ varied 0.88-1.1 and 1.46-2.26 in these
subgroups accordingly. Hence lower biological activity of hyperprolactinemic sera
with the predominance of macroprolactin was proven.
Thus in cases of macroprolactinemia normal monomeric prolactin levels (with
proven low biological activity of serum) can coexist with menstrual disorders
and/or  infertility  due  to  other  reasons,  and  mimic  true  hyperprolactinemic
conditions. Some of patients with macroprolactinemia also had pituitary
incidentaloma. To avoid misinterpretation of clinical and hormonal data we
support assessing for macroprolactin in all patients with total prolactin levels
!5000 mIU/l regardless of symptoms.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP918
EP919
Cardiovascular effects of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) on
acromegaly
Zuleyha Karaca1, Hatice Dogan1, Sevda Ismailogullari2, Nihat Kalay3,
Fatih Tanriverdi1, Kursad Unluhizarci1, Asli Sezgin Caglar1 &
Fahrettin Kelestimur1
1Department of Endocrinology, Erciyes University Medical School,
Kayseri, Turkey;2Department of Neurology, Erciyes University Medical
School, Kayseri, Turkey;3Department of Cardiology, Erciyes University
Medical School, Kayseri, Turkey.
Introduction
Acromegaly is known to be associated with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
(OSAS) in about 60-70% of the cases. Both OSAS and acromegaly are thought to
be responsible from cardiovascular diseases and endothelial dysfunction. The aim
of the present study was to investigate the role of OSAS on cardiovascular effects
of acromegaly.
Materials and Methods
25 patients with acromegaly and 7 healthy volunteers were enrolled into the study.
Cardiac and endothelial functions were evaluated with echocardiography (ECHO),
carotis  intima-media  thickness
(CIMT),  aortic  stiffness  and  flow  mediated
dilatation (FMD). All subjects were performed polysomnography (PSG). Patients
were categorized into 3 groups according to their apnea-hypopnea index (AHİ).
AHİ of !5 was accepted as normal, O15 as OSAS and between 5-15 as borderline.
Results
10
(40%) patients were found to have OSAS, 7 (28%) had borderline AHİ and 8
(32%) patients were normal. No differences were found between acromegaly and
healthy controls in means of CIMT, aortic stiffness and ECHO parameters. FMD
was found to be lower in acromegalic patients (8.9G4.7%) than in healthy
controls (18.8G2.2%). FMD, CIMT, aortic stiffness and ECHO parameters were
found to be similar in 3 acromegalic groups. No correlation was found between
AHI and FMD, CIMT or aortic stiffness.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Acromegaly leads to endothelial dysfunction. Presence of OSAS in acromegalic
patients  does  not  seem  to  cause  further  deterioration  of  cardiovascular  or
endothelial functions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP919
EP920
Fatigue and subjective complaints in patients with active and controlled
acromegaly: a cross sectional multi-center study
Anca Zimmermann1, Rudiger Zwerenz2, Michael Droste3, Christof Schofl4,
Christian J Strasburger5, Ursula Plockinger6, Jurgen Honegger7,
Bledar Millaku1, Manfred E Beutel2 & Matthias M Weber1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, 1, Medical Clinic,
University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany;2Clinic and Polyclinic for
Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany;3Endocrinology and Diabetology Praxis Oldenburg, Oldenburg,
Germany;4Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, 1, Medical
Clinic, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany;5Clinic for
Endocrinology, Diabetology and Nutrition, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin,
Germany;6Endocrinology, Interdisciplinary Metabolic Center, Charité
Campus Virchow-Clinicum, Berlin, Germany;7Neurosurgery Clinic,
University of Tubingen, Tubingen, Germany.
Introduction
Acromegalic patients (AP) often report fatigue and chronic subjective complaints.
We aimed to investigate in more detail these aspects in AP, dependent on disease
activity, age, gender, medication and pituitary insufficiency (PI).
Patients/methods
Cross  sectional,
124
patients
(M/W  51/73,  age
58.3G14.7
years,
49/75-
active/controlled disease). The patients completed the Multidimensional Fatigue
Inventory (MFI-20) and the Giessen Subjective Complaints List (GBB-24), after
written informed consent. Age, gender, IGF-1 concentrations, comorbidities,
treatment modalities and PI were documented.
Results
The MFI-20 inventory showed higher age- and gender-specific values on all
fatigue subscales compared to controls (general and mental fatigue, decreased
motivation and decreased activity), except physical fatigue, which was obviously
higher only in patients under 60 years of age. No differences were observed
between patients dependent on disease activity, age, gender and PI. The GBB
inventory showed more gastric, joint and general complaints in patients with a
disease duration O10 years. In this group, patients were older (62.2G13.6 vs.
53.3G14.4 years); however, 14/67 had an active disease compared to 35/57
patients with a disease duration % 10 years (P!0.001). Patients with PI exhibited
more exhaustion (PZ0.01), gastric (PZ0.005), joint (PZ0.02) and general
complaints (PZ0.006) compared to patients without PI. Patients who needed
chronic medication for disease control had higher scores for exhaustion than
patients without medication (PZ0.03). Interestingly, there were no significant
differences between patients with active and controlled disease or between
patients with one or more PIs. Even if complaint scores were higher in patients
after more than one pituitary surgical intervention or after sellar radiotherapy, the
differences did not reach significance.
Conclusions
AP display more fatigue than healthy controls. Chronic subjective complaints are
more  pronounced  in  patients  with  a  disease  duration  O10
years,  PI  and
medication for disease control, irrespective of the hormonal activity status.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP920
EP921
Quality of life, neurocognitive status and frequency of hypopituitarism
following brain injury
Bensalah Meriem1, Nebal Mustapha2, Cherfi Lyes3, Abdenebi Benaissa4,
Guenane Mustapha5, Kemali Zahra1 & Ould Kablia Samia1
1Endocrinology Department, Centarl Hospital of Army, Algiers, Algeria;
2Neurosurgery Department, Central Hospital of Army, Algiers, Algeria;
3Intensive Care Unit, Central Hospital of Army, Algiers, Algeria;
4Neurosurgery Department, Zemirli Hospital, Algiers, Algeria;5Intensive
Care Unit, Zemirli Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Background
Post traumatic Hypopituitarism (PTHP) is common, its prevalence is about 30%.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Aim
The aim is firstly to assess the frequency and predictive factors of hypopituitarism
3 and 12 months following Brain injury (BI) in a simple of 133 victims of
moderate to severe BI in two neighbors’ hospitals in the east of Algiers. Secondly
is to evaluate the quality of life and neurocognitive status of this cohort.
Method
Hypopituitarism, evaluation of quality of life and neurocognitive status were
searched in 133 victims of moderate to severe BI.
Result
Mean age was 32 years with male predominance. Traffic accident was the most
frequent cause of BI. The frequency of PTHP at three months after injury was
44%  with  31.5%  of  corticotrop  failure,
18%  of  GH  deficiency,  6.8%  of
gonadotropin  deficiency,
6.8%  of  hypoprolactinemia,
1.5%  of  thyrotrophic
deficiency and 3.8% of hyperprolactinemia. Predictive factors of occurrence of
PTHP was skull base fracture, duration of intubation and coma and initial
traumatic imaging. The prevalence of PTHP at twelve months after injury was
34.5% with 25% of corticotropic failure, 17.2% of GH deficiency, 8.6% of
gonadotropic deficiency,
5.17% of hypoprolactinemia, 0.9% of thyrotrophic
deficiency and 8.6% of hyperprolactinemia. Predictive factors of Twelve months
PTHP was the duration of intubation and coma and polytraumatism. Among the
patients with PTHP at three months 50.8% still in hypopituitarism. 14.8% of non
PTHP patients at three months developed PTHP at 12 months. 40.67% of patients
with hypopituitarism at three months have recovered their pituitary functions at
12 months. A link was found between PTHP and impairment of quality of life at
3 months and one year using AGHDA and SF-36 scales. PTHP patients have
more  neurocognitive  disorders  using  NRS-R  scale  than  non  hypopituitaric
patients at three months but not at 12 months after the injury.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP921
EP922
Clinical characteristics of giant pituitary adenomas
Irena Ilovayskaya, Alexander Dreval, Yulia Krivosheeva & Galina Stashuk
Moscow Regional Research & Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russia.
Our Pituitary Tumour Registry includes data about 346 patients with pituitary
macroadenomas: 142 non-functional adenomas (NFA) including 18 (12.7%)
giant, 62 macroprolactinomas - 6 (9.7%) giant, 141 somatotropinomas - 6 (4.3%)
giant. We analysed clinical features of these 30 giant pituitary tumors (!40 mm
at least one of the sizes):
18 NFA (11 Females; 7 Males), 6 prolactinomas
(3 Females; 3 Males), 6 somatotropinomas (3 Females; 3 Males). Patients with
giant NFA were of the same age as others with NFA, however patients with giant
prolactinomas and somatotropinomas were 10-15 years younger than mean age of
their group.
According to MRI data pituitary sizes were: NFA - sagittal 28-56 mm (35 [31;
43] mm); vertical 23-51 mm (42 [33; 45] mm), frontal 26-62 mm (42 [36; 46]
mm);  prolactinomas
- sagittal
40-62  mm  (43.5  [41.5;
59]  mm),  vertical
25-65 mm (46 [37; 56] mm), frontal 30-62 mm (50 [32; 58] mm); somato-
tropinomas - sagittal 23-67 mm (53 [39.5; 65.5] mm), vertical 30-61 mm (49.5
[40; 54], frontal 34-60 mm (47 [37; 60] mm).
Pituitary  tumour  volumes  were:  NFA
16,998-68,753 mm3
(Median
28,190
[21,143;
44,896]  mm3);  prolactinomas
16,876-130,760 mm3
(48,091
[30,331;97,843]  mm3;  and  somatotropinomas
19,644-124,501 mm3
(51,209
[36,703;102,207] mm3). The most often observed tumour growth directions
were supra-latero-infrasellar (nZ19, 63.3%), and supra-latero-sellar (nZ6.20%).
Chiasm compression visualized on MR-images in 24 (80%) patients (18 NFA,
3 prolactinomas and 3 somatotropinomas).
Main complains were visual impairment (18 patients, 60%) and headache (12
patients, 40%), and most often “first referred” specialists were ophthalmologist
and neurologist in 15 (50%) and 11 (36.7%) cases, accordingly. Hypopituitarism
before any treatment was found in 10 (33.3%) cases (7 NFA, 1 prolactinoma,
2 somatotropinomas), all tumors had vertical size O40 mm and significant
suprasellar extension.
Thus,  age
!50  y.o.  and  tumor  volume  O70,000 mm3  were  predictors  of
hormonal activity of giant adenoma; vertical size O40 mm and suprasellar
extension were predictors of hypopituitarism; ophthalmologist and neurologist
should be aware of giant adenomas.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP922
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP923
Recurrent meningitis secondary to medically induced CSF leakage in
the setting of a pituitary macroprolactinoma
Seifeldin Yahia & Simon Page
Nottingham University Hospital- Queen’s Medical Centre QMC,
Nottingham, UK.
A 49 year old gentleman was diagnosed with a pituitary macroprolactinoma at
Leicester Royal Infirmary (LRI) (Baseline prolactin 8000 mU/l). He was treated
with Cabergoline 0.5 mg twice/week. He developed CSF rhinorrhoea shortly after
treatment was commenced and was listed for repair under the neurosurgical team
at Queen’s Medical Centre (QMC). Six weeks later, while visiting Wales, he was
admitted to Bangor hospital with headaches and vomiting. CSF cultures were
positive for pneumococcus so he was treated with a 10 day course of Ceftriaxone.
He continued on cabergoline and this was associated with persistence of his CSF
leak. He was discharged without prophylactic antibiotics with a plan for his CSF
repair to be done 6/52 later at QMC in Nottingham. He was re-admitted to the LRI
3 weeks later with similar headaches and vomiting and was treated for recurrent
meningitis with Meropenem despite negative cultures on CSF. He improved
clinically, but he continued to experience a significant CSF leak. Two weeks later,
he had a trans-sphenoidal repair of the sella using abdominal fat and fascia. This
procedure as was unsuccessful, 4 weeks later, he underwent a second endoscopic
repair with a vascularized nasoseptal flap and was discharged with no further
problems.
Discussion
CSF rhinorrhoea may occur in the setting of pituitary adenomas, following a
favourable response of invasive prolactinomas to initiation of dopamine agonist
therapy. This risk might be even greater with cabergoline than with other
dopamine agonists, due to the high sensitivity of prolactinomas to cabergoline.
CSF leakage can occur within days of treatment and even minimal tumour
shrinkage may lead to the development of a CSF fistula. Thus, we advise
monitoring  these  patients  closely  and  to  actively  forewarn  them  of  this
complication  and  the  risk  of  life  threatening  meningitis.  In  this  situation,
prophylactic antibiotics to prevent meningitis remain controversial. Surgical
intervention via a trans-sphenoidal approach is the recommended initial treatment
for definitive repair of the CSF leak.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP923
EP924
Coexidence of neuroendocrine tumor of the lung and pituitary adenoma
- pitfalls in diagnosing acromegaly - case report
Joanna Sztembis1, Renata Orłowska-Florek1,2 & Grzegorz S´ wider1
1Clinical Hospital No 2, Rzeszów, Poland;2Medical University, Rzeszów,
Poland.
Acromegaly is caused by growth hormone-secreting adenoma in more then 95%
cases. Ectopic secretion of GH-RH is a rare cause of acromegaly accounting for
less than 1% of all cases. The most frequent source of ectopic GHRH is bronchial
carcinoid. Clinical and biochemical findings are similar in both conditions. A
distinction of pituitary vs extrapituitary acromegaly is important in planning
effective management and both reasons should be considered in the diagnostic
process.
Case report
An 80-year-old woman with the clinical features of acromegaly (hypertension,
congestive heart failure, osteoarthritis of the knees, carpal tunnel syndrome,
enlargement of mandibule, hands and feet) was admitted to the Endocrinology
Unit for further evaluation. The lab test confirmed acromegaly. The pituitary
tumor was not found on MRI. The hypothesis of acromegaly secondary to ectopic
GHRH secretion was propounded. The lung tumors (9!9!6 mm and 5 mm)
were detected in CT scans. There was no confirmation of lung or pituitary
pathology in somatostatin receptor scintigraphy. PET-CT revealed a presence of
higher expression of somatostatin receptors in 10th segment of left lung. The lung
tumor was successfully removed (histologically NET). The postoperative IGF1
level was still elevated with no GH suppression during the OGTT. The MRI of the
pituitary was repeated and finally pituitary tumor was found (3.5!7!4.5 mm
anterior lobe). The patient was successfully operated and biochemically cured.
Conclusions
Despite the rare occurrence of acromegaly, it shoild always be considered during
the diagnosis. Only detailed evaluation may facilitate prompt diagnosis and
recovery from this destructive disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP924
EP925
Macroprolactinemia: prevalence and clinical characteristics in a cohort
of hyperprolactinemic patients assessed for macroprolactinemia
Joanna Prokop1, Raquel Espirito Santo1, Teresa Sabino1,
Conceição Godinho2 & Ana Agapito1
1Endocrinology Department, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon,
Portugal;2Clinical Pathology Department, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa
Central, Lisbon, Portugal.
Macroprolactin is a collective term for a heterogenous group of high molecular
mass forms of prolactin with minimal bioactivity in vivo. Objective: to determine
prevalence of macroprolactinemia (macroPRL) and clinical characteristics of
patients with hyperprolactinemia (hyperPRL) who underwent assessment for
macroPRL in Endocrinology outpatient clinic.
Methods
We  reviewed  the  medical  records  of  54  patients  who  were  evaluated  for
macroPRL between 04/2010-10/2015. MacroPRL was evaluated by PEG serum
precipitation
(prolactin  recovery%40%-macroPRL,
40-60%-inconclusive
R60%-absence of macroPRL).
Results
Fifty four patients (49 women; 5 men) underwent assessment for macroPRL:
21
(38.9%) had macroprPRL, 29 (53.7%) monomeric hyperPRL and 4 (7.4%)
were not conclusive. Among premenopausal women with macroPRL the most
common complaints were: galactorrhea (23.5%), menstrual irregularities (29.4%),
infertility (29.4%), while among those with true hyperPRL they were found in
45%, 50%, and 15% respectively. No symptoms were reported in 22.2% of
patients with macroPRL and 14.8% with true hyperPRL. Three male patients had
macroPRL and symptoms: erectile dysfunction, infertility or galactorrhea. Two
men with true hyperPRL presented: erectile dysfunction with gynecomastia and
headaches with visual disturbances. Six patients with macroPRL had performed
pituitary image studies before assessment of macroprolactin: 1 microadenoma
with deviation of the pituitary stalk and 3 not conclusive. Twenty two patients
with  true  hyperPRL  underwent  image  studies:
7-normal  findings,
2-microadenoma,  2-macroadenoma,  4-not conclusive,  1-extra-pituitary  infra-
sellar lesion. Comments: in our study high prevalence of macroPRL (38.9%) was
observed. Symptoms were common in macroPRL and true hyperPRL groups and
the number of asymptomatic patients was similar. It confirms that it is not possible
to  distinguish  macroPRL  from  true  hyperPRL  on  the  basis  of  clinical
characteristics and laboratory screening is required. Assessment for macroPRL
should  be  a  part  of  initial  evaluation  of  hyperPRL,  not  only  reserved  to
asymptomatic patients. If macroPRL is not recognized it results in misdiagnosis,
unnecessary imaging and treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP925
EP926
Pituitary tuberculosis: a cause of giant cell granulomatous hypophysitis
presented with hypopituitarism
Narin Nasiroglu Imga1, Eda Demir Onal1, Ercan Kahraman2, Dilek Berker1
& Serdar Guler1,3
1Department of Endocrinology, Ankara Numune Education and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Pathology, Ankara Numune
Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;3Department of
Endocrinology, Corum Hitit University School of Medicine, Corum,
Turkey.
Introduction
Giant cell granulomatous hypophysitis is a rare chronic inflammatory disorder of
the pituitary gland. It is generally presents with a clinic of sellar mass lesion with
pituitary  insufficiency.  Histologically  it  is  characterized  by  composites  of
histiocytes, plasma cells and giant cells with or without areas of necrosis.
Tuberculosis is a very rare cause of secondary granulomatous hypophysitis. We
report a case presented with hypopituitarism symptoms due to tuberculosis
etiology  and  pathology  revealed  non-caseating  giant  cell  granulomatous
hypophysitis.
Case Report
A 51-year-old female admitted to our clinic with symptoms of mild headache and
lethargy. Laboratory findings revealed TSH: 2.28 mIU/ml (normal, 0.34-5.6) fT3:
2.08 pg/ml (normal, 2.5-3.9) fT4: 0.56 ng/dl (normal, 0.61-1.12). The laboratory
findings were suggest the central hypothyroidism. Gonadotropin levels were
consistent with menopause. Basal cortisol level was found 2 mg/dl. Serum sodium
and potassium levels were in normal range. Insulin tolerance test was performed
for evaluation of the peak levels of cortisol and GH response. Peak GH and
cortisol levels found
0.43 ng/ml and 14.75 mg/dl, respectively. Afterwards a
diagnosis of pituitary hormone deficiency was made. Steroid was initially started
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
and  later  on  levothyroxine  therapy  was  added.  MRI  showed  a  significant
enlargement in adenohypophysis. Transsphenoidal biopsy of sella was done for
the  diagnosis.  Pathology  showed  multinucleated  giant  cells  characterised
noncaseating granulomatous inflammation. Stain for acid fast bacilli and fungal
etiologies were negative. The evaluation of etiology and differential diagnosis of
granulomatous hypophysitis was done. Tuberculosis was diagnosed. The patient
was started to receive antitubercular therapy including Pyrazinamide, Strepto-
mycin, Isoniazid and Rifampicin for first 3 months, after that continued with
Isoniazid and Rifampicin for 9 months.
Discussion
Pituitary  tuberculosis  should  be  considered  in  the  differential  diagnosis  of
granulomatous hypophysitis. The early and quick diagnosis is an important
concern because the disease may be reversible with anti tubercular therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP926
EP927
Results of transsphenoidal surgery and somatostatin analogues
therapies and their combination in acromegaly
Irina Trigolosova, Alexander Dreval, Evgenia Panteleeva,
Galina Molchanova & Irina Chikh
Moscow Regional Scientific Research Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russia.
Introduction
Data on transsphenoidal surgery (TSS) and effect of somatostatin analog therapy
(SSA) in acromegaly different among medical centers. We analyzed the data on
TSS, SSA and their combination in acromegalic patients of Moscow region.
Design
In this study 117 acromegalic patients (25 males and 92 females, 55.0 (IQR 44 -
62) years) were eligible for participation, of whom 34 were newly-diagnosed
aromegaly (NA group) (macroadenoma (macro)- 80%), 35 primary treated with
SSA group (macro K60%), 29 after TSS group, (macro K73%), 19 SSA after
TSS (macro - 95%). In 34 NA patients we assessed efficiency after 6 months of
SSA (23 patients) (macro K78%) and TSS (10 patients) (macro K70%). We also
assessed efficiency of SSA therapy after 6 months in 10 patients (macro K100%)
without control of acromegaly after TSS (SSACTSS).
Results
In micro adenoma cases number of patients with controlled phase of acromegaly
was comparable between TSS and SSA groups (47% and 43%). In macro
adenoma cases controlled phase of acromegaly was greater in TSS and TSSC
SSA groups in compare with SSA group (43%, 40 and 35% accordingly). Among
NA patients, who started treatment of SSA or underwent TSS the %ULN of IGF-1
greater decreased in TSS group than in SSA group (P!0.05) (from 172 (83.7-
238.1) to K22.6 (K36.7-23.7)% (P!0.05) and from 227 (136-342)% to 30.7
(3.0-118.4)%, accordingly, (P!0.05)). In group TSSCSSA the %ULN of IGF-1
decreased  from
158.5
(53.7-215.8)%  to
1.4
(K11.7-34.5)%  accordingly,
(P!0.05). The controlled phase of acromegaly in macro- and micro adenoma
cases was reached in 40% and 50% after primary SSA treatment, in 57% and
100% after primary TSS, accordingly, and in 50% in SSA C TSS.
Conclusion
The primary TSS lowered IGF1 values more efficiently and allowed to reach
control of disease in compare with primary SSA treatment, especially in macro
adenoma cases in acromegalic patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP927
EP928
Bone metabolism in acromegaly
Antonella Giampietro1, Sabrina Chiloiro1, Marilda Mormando1,
Chiara Bima1, Maria Elena Bracaccia1, Serena Piacentini1,
Linda Tartaglione1, Donato Iacovazzo1,2, Antonio Bianchi1 &
Laura De Marinis1
1Pituitary Unit, Departments of Endocrinology, Catholic University School
of Medicine, Rome, Italy;2Barts and The London School of Medicine,
London, UK.
Aim
To evaluate calcium and bone metabolism in a monocentric series of acromegaly
patients (pts), treated with pegvisomant (PEG) alone or in association to long
acting somatostatine analogs.
Patients and methods
All  pts  with  at  least
24  consecutive  months  PEG  treatment
(alone  or  in
combination with SSA) were enrolled. All pts had been tested at least twice/year
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
for  biochemical  acromegaly-disease  evaluation  and  annually  for  calcium
metabolism and for bone metabolism though serum test. In all the cases, BMD
of femoral neck and lumbar spine was measured by DXA. Measurements were
made at the time of the spinal X-ray. Fractured vertebrae (VF), were excluded
from the lumbar BMD analysis. A quantitative morphometrical assessment of
VFs in the T4-L4 region had been performed using a dedicated morphometrical
software (Spine-X Analyzer, ICAM Diagnostics, Milan, Italy).
Results
A total of 24 pts met the inclusion criteria. 8 were male (33.3%). Mean age at
acromegaly diagnosis was 39.3 years. 11 pts had a biochemically controlled
acromegaly (45.8%). PEG treatment was prescribed in 5 cases as monotherapy. A
total of 16 VFs were documented and occurred in 8 pts. Mean spine BMD was
1.09 and mean femoral BMD was 0.9. VF, spine and femoral BMD are not
influenced in our series from gender, GH receptor isoform expression, secondary
hypogonadism, menopause, bone metabolism markers and hormonal replacement
treatment for hypogonadism, hypoadrenalism and hypothyroidism. We found that
biochemically acromegaly status strongly correlated with VF: a higher number of
VF were observed in not biochemically controlled acromegaly pts. Moreover,
active acromegaly status correlated with a 10-folds higher risk of VF (PZ0.012,
OR: 10.12 95%IC 1.47-69.9). Moreover, in male acromegalic pt, VF correlated
also with lower serum testosterone (PZ0.02) and SHBG value (P!0.001). In
female acromegaly pts we failed to find any correlation between gonadic status
and VF. In conclusion, our study confirm the risk of VFs in acromegaly and
suggest that fracture risk is higher in not biochemically controlled acromegaly pts,
particularly in males with low testosterone value.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP928
EP929
Clinical management of pituitary teratomas and safety of rhgh
replacement therapy: a case report
Sabrina Chiloiro, Antonella Giampietro, Chiara Bima, Maria
Elena Bracaccia & Laura De Marinis
Pituitary Unit, Departments of Endocrinology, Catholic University School
of Medicine, Rome, Italy.
Teratomas comprise 0.5% of all intracranial tumors. 15 cases of sellar teratoma
have been described in the last 24 years (yrs). A 29-yrs female pan-hypopituitaric
patient (pt) was admitted to our Pituitary Unit. At 6-yrs age, for polyuria and
growth  delay,  an  endocrine  evaluation  revealed  diabetes  insipidus  and
hypopituitarism.  Cranial contrasted-MRI
(cc-MRI)  showed  pituitary  stalk
thickening  and  a  low  intensity  suprasellar  lesion.  Histological  examination
(HE) was suggestive for germinoma. Conventional radiotherapy was performed.
After 6 months (mts) for disease-progression, a second biopsy was performed and
HE was suggestive of 3th ventricle choroid plexus papilloma. Pt underwent
radical neurosurgical resection. HE was conclusive for mature teratoma. At
10-yrs age, pt weight was 38 Kg (90th percentile), height was 124 cm (3rd
percentile) and growth velocity was 3 cm/yr (!3rd percentile). Clonidine test
suggested  an  impaired  GH  secretion.  cc-MRI  didn’t  documented  teratoma
recurrence (rec). After 3 disease-free survival yrs, rhGH replacement therapy
(rhGH-RT) was started. Every 6 mts, endocrinological and neuroradiological
evaluation were scheduled. At 18-yrs age, cc-MRI evidenced a falx cerebri lesion.
rhGH-RT was discontinued. Pt underwent neurosurgery. HE documented an
atypical  meningioma.
1-yr  post-surgery  cc-MRI  confirmed  tumor  radical
resection.  rhGH-RT  was  re-started.  Every
6
mts,  endocrinological  and
neuroradiological evaluation was scheduled. At 27-yrs age, cc-MRI showed
meningioma rec. Pt underwent second radical neurosurgery. HE documented
transitional meningioma with strong immunohistochemical positivity for GH
receptor. rhGH-RT was discontinued. At admission in our department, laboratory
tests confirmed panhypopituitarism,  cc-MRI was negative for teratoma and
meningioma rec. We confirmed the rhGH-RT discontinuation. To our knowledge,
our case is the first describing rhGH-RT safety in a pt with teratoma history.
Teratomas should be taken into account in the diagnosis of pituitary region tumors
for allowing patients to benefit of correct treatment and later of a complete
hormonal replacement therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP929
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP930
Pituitary apoplexy induced remission in a macroadenoma Cushing
Disease
Pedro Souteiro1, Sandra Belo1, Maria Manuel Costa1, Rita Bettencourt-
Silva1, Daniela Magalhães1, Joana Queirós1, Paula Freitas1, Ligia Castro2,
Josué Pereira3 & Davide Carvalho1
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro
Hospitalar Sa˜o João, Porto, Portugal;2Department of Pathology,
Centro Hospitalar São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal;3Department of Neurosurgery,
Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
Pituitary macroincidentalomas are rare, being found in only 0.2%-0.3% of the
patients that undergo imaging studies for an unrelated reason. The majority of
them are non-functioning adenomas.
Case Report
Woman, 77 years-old, with type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension and primary
hypothyroidism.  She  was  referred  to  Endocrinology  due  to  a  pituitary
incidentaloma (18 mm of maximal diameter, with extension to the cavernous
sinus and to the optic chiasm) diagnosed in a CT scan that was performed due to
syncopal episodes. The patient also reported sporadic headaches and visual acuity
loss.  No  endocrinopathy  stigmata  were  found  on  physical  examination.
Laboratory study revealed a high late night salivary cortisol, a high ACTH and
a positive
1-mg  overnight  dexamethasone  suppression  test
(6.2 mg/dl).  An
elevated plasmatic cortisol in the low dose dexamethasone suppression test
(29.2 mg/dl) confirmed the diagnosis of Cushing Syndrome. One week after the
diagnosis, the patient presented to the Emergency Department (ER) with severe
headaches, nausea, vomits and psychomotor impairment. Blood tests shown
severe hyponatremia (114 mEq/l). Despite the ER head CT scan revealed no
significant alterations, the patient was given 100 mg of hydrocortisone and she
was hospitalized due to the clinical suspicion of a pituitary apoplexy. The
hormonal study revealed panhypopituitarism (serum cortisol 12 mg/dl; ACTH
41.3 ng/l;  TSH
0.04 mUI/l;  FSH
2.14
mU/ml;  LH  0.23  mUI/ml;  prolactin
4.6 ng/ml) and the pituitary MRI demonstrated features of tumoral haemorrhage,
confirming the apoplexy hypothesis. She maintained glucocorticoid therapy with
symptomatic improvement and progressive correction of the sodium levels.
Conclusions
Pituitary apoplexy is rare but it can be a serious health issue if not promptly
recognized.  In  this  particular  case,  the  apoplexy  led  to  hypercortisolism
resolution. Thus, if the revaluation MRI shows significant tumoral shrinking,
the patient will no longer have surgical indication.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP930
EP931
Diabetes insipidus as a predictor of weight gain in craniopharyngeoma
patients
Tanja Skoric Polovina, Ivana Kraljevic, Mirsala Solak, Tina Dusek &
Darko Kastelan
Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia.
Craniopharyngeoma  patients  have  reduced  quality  of  life  and  increased
cardiovascular mortality because of severe obesity present in about 50% of
patients. In the present study we analysed postoperative body mass index (BMI)
in  craniopharyngeoma  patients  depending  on  the  presence  of  the  diabetes
insipidus (DI).
We retrospectively analyzed 19 craniopharyngeoma patients (male:femaleZ
12:7, age 31.2 years, range 9-67) treated at our Department since 2001. The
majority of patients underwent transcranial surgery (18/19), 10/19 underwent
complete  debulking  and
9/19
underwent  incomplete  resection  followed  by
radiotherapy of residual tumor. BMI was measured before and after the treatment.
All patients were evaluated for the presence of DI. Median BMI before the
treatment was 26.4 kg/m2  (17.7-40.8) and it increased significantly after the
surgery (30.6 kg/m2 (23.2-46), P!0.0001). Before the treatment only one patient
had DI whereas postoperatively 13/19 patients developed DI. Postoperative BMI
of the patients with DI was significantly higher compared to those without DI
(31.5 kg/m2 (27.1-46) vs. 27.45 kg/m2 (23.2-31.6), PZ0.012).
Craniopharyngeoma patients that developed postoperative DI had significantly
higher BMI suggesting a predictive role of postoperative DI in the development of
hypothalamic obesity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP931
EP932
“What’s the best approach to perioperative, immediate post op and
6 week post op cortisol assessment and replacement in patients
undergoing transsphenoidal pituitary surgery?”
Adnan Tariq1, Dhruti Bhatt1,2, Alex Graveling1, Prakash Abraham1,
Kamel Mahmoud1,2, Sandra MacRury2 & John Bevan1
1ARI, Aberdeen, UK;2Raigmore Hospital, Inverness, UK.
Introduction
There is great variation in management of perioperative cortisol management in
patient’s undergoing pituitary surgery across UK Hospitals. We evaluated safety
and effectiveness of standards followed in ARI. The aim of audit was to confirm
safety, improve knowledge and change practice for better patient care if needed
based on information gained from the available data.
Description of methods/design
We evaluated 30 patients who have undergone pituitary surgery from 01/01/13 to
31/12/14
for  Pituitary  adenoma
(functioning or  non  functioning) excluding
Cushing’s disease in ARI. Data was gathered from paper notes and using
electronic record system about perioperative, immediate post op and 6-week post
op cortisol assessment.
Tools for pre-operative HPA Axis Assessment
Results and conclusion
1. Short synacthen test is effective tool in assessment of perioperative cortisol
sufficiency. 2. If SST is not available, basal cortisol can be used but a higher safety
bar needs to be used. 3. Early morning cortisol monitoring is important in post op
patients deemed steroid sufficient. 4. All patients discharged home without steroid
immediately post op remained steroid sufficient at 6-week assessment (100%
safety). 5. 50% of patients receiving steroids post surgery were able to discontinue
them after 6-weeks review. 6. Some variability in interpretation of SST (often
taking into account clinical features and variation of different assay’s used in
hospitals). 7. Patients with borderline results need steroid cover for intercurrent
illness.
Outcome
Developing leaflet for patients needing intercurrent steroid cover.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP932
EP933
Obstructive hydrocephalus and intracranial hypertension caused by a
giant pituitary non-functioning adenoma
Julia Silva-Fernández1, Rafael García-Ruiz2, Francisco Javier Gómez-
Alfonso1, Florentino Del Val-Zaballos1, Álvaro García-Manzanares1,
María López-Iglesias1 & Inés R Gómez-García1
1Endocrinology Department La Mancha Centro Hospital, Alcázar de San
Juan (Ciudad Real), Spain;2Neurology Department, Alcázar de San Juan
(Ciudad Real), Spain.
Introduction
Patients  with  large  non-functioning  pituitary  macroadenomas  often  have
symptoms due to varying degree of hypopituitarism and/or mass effect on visual
structures, while presentation with hydrocephalus is extremely uncommon.
Case report
We describe an 82-year-old man who was referred to the Neurology department
of our hospital because of rapidly progressive memory loss. The patient was in
good health until ten weeks earlier, when he insidiously began to develop memory
impairment,  headaches  and  progressive  asthenia.  Ophtalmic  examination
revealed  bitemporal  hemianopia  and  bilateral  papilloedema.  The  contrast
enhanced CT scan of head revealed a well-defined enhancing mass in the sella
and suprasellar region extending into the lumen of the 3rd ventricle producing
obstructive hydrocephalus. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the
sellar  mass  with  supra  and  parasellar  extension  compatible  with  pituitary
macroadenoma (6!2.6!2.6 cm) associated with active hydrocephalus. Endo-
crinologic evaluation confirmed panhypopituitarism, therefore, hormone replace-
ment therapy was immediately instituted. At the same time, surgical resection was
planned but the patient and his family refused both surgical excision and external
drainage.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
Obstructive hydrocephalus as a late complication of adenomas or after pituitary
surgery has been described, but the initial clinical manifestation of a pituitary
adenoma with symptomatic hydrocephalus is rare.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP933
EP934
The outcomes of the transsphenoidal adenomectomy in patients with
acromegaly
Alexander Tsiberkin, Vladislav Cherebillo, Ulyana Tsoi, Anna Dalmatova,
Lydia Belousova & Elena Grineva
Federal Almazov North-West Medical Research Centre, St. Petersburg,
Russia.
Introduction
Acromegaly is a chronic disorder caused by growth hormone (GH) hyperproduc-
tion  which  leads  to  significant  morbidity  and  mortality  primarily  due  to
cardiovascular and respiratory complications. Pituitary adenoma is the main
cause of GH’s hyperproduction. By current guidelines transsphenoidal surgery
(TSS) is the first-line treatment in acromegaly patients.
Aim
To evaluate the results of TSS in acromegaly patients 6 months after surgery.
Materials and methods
65 patients (48 women and 17 men), mean age 51.2G11.8 years (range 25-72
years)  were  enrolled  into  the  study.  Majority  of  our  patients
(75%)  had
macroadenomas. Only sixteen patients (25%) had microadenomas. All TSS were
performed by one neurosurgeon. 6 months after surgery a nadir serum GH within
2 hours after 75 g of oral glucose and IGF-1 were estimated. Remission of
acromegaly was considered as: nadir serum GH!0.4 mg/l after an oral glucose
load and age-normalized serum IGF-1 value.
Results
Acromegaly remission was confirmed in 17 (26.1%) patients. Remission was
established in 56.2% (9 out of 16) patients with the pituitary microadenomas.
Among patients with macroadenomas remission was proved in 16.3% (8 out
of 49) cases. Patients with the persisting disease have demonstrated significantly
higher initial basal GH level (P!0.006).
Conclusions
According to our data TSS was effective in 26.1% cases. The rather low remission
rate was associated with macroadenomas predominance in our study group.
Microadenoma presence and low initial basal GH value increased the probability
of remission.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP934
EP935
A rare case of ulcerative colitis coexisting with lymphocytic
hypophysitis
Serkan Rendeci1, Aydin Cifci1, Senay Arikan Durmaz2, Askin Gungunes2 &
Sinan Tan3
1Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kirikkale
University, Kirikkale, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology, School of
Medicine, Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Department of
Radiology, School of Medicine, Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey.
Background and aim
Lymphocytic  hypophysitis  is  heterogeneous  inflammatory  processes  of  the
pituitary gland and may cause isolated hormone deficiency, but rarely occurs as
panhypopituitarism. We aim to present a rare case of ulcerative colitis coexisting
with lymphocytic hypophysitis.
Case report
A 42-years old woman with ulcerative colitis was applied for our department of
internal medicine with hypoglycemia. Her capillary blood glucose levels were
found 22 and 33 mg/dl without typical hypoglycemic symptoms. She complained
from  weakness,  anorexia,  weight  loss,  secondary  amenorrhea  and  chronic
diarrhea for three months. She was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis 11 years ago
and was treated with meselazine tablets and enema. Oral steroid therapy was
started in 2014 and doses were gradually tapered and stopped. Her physical
examination revealed pulse rate of 55 per minute, blood pressure of 90/60 mm Hg
with pale skin. No other abnormal finding was found on physical examination.
Secondary hypothyroidism and secondary adrenal insufficiency were considered
according  to  endocrinological  examinations.  Prolonged
75 g  oral  glucose
tolerance test was also performed, hypoglycaemia was not observed during the
test. Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging showed findings consistent with
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
lymphocytic hypophysitis. Present laboratory and imaging findings suggested the
presence of lymphocytic hypophysitis. She was initially treated with hydrocorti-
sone and then L-thyroxine replacement therapy. After the treatment, we observed
markedly improvement her signs and symptoms such as weakness, anorexia and
hypoglycemia.
Conclusions
Although some autoimmune diseases may be together, coexistence of ulcerative
colitis and lymphocytic hypophysitis is rarely situation. These patients should be
followed in terms of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP935
EP936
Mesocorticotropinoma- associated Nelson’s syndrome: 28 years of
follow-up
Alexandra Marcusan2, Andra Morar2, Mara Carsote3, Dan Dumitru Pop4,
Cristina Ghervan1,2, Carmen Emanuela Georgescu1,2 & Ana Valea1,2
1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;2Clinical County Hospital Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;
3Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy & C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;4Department of
Radiotherapy, Prof. Dr. Ion Chiricuta Oncology Institute Cluj-Napoca,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction
Nelson’s syndrome (NS) is an exceptionally rare condition diagnosed sometimes
after bilateral suprarenalectomy for Cushing’s disease
(CS) involving rapid
enlargement of a pre-existing ACTH-secreting pituitary tumor. The clinical
picture  varies  from  hyperpigmentation,  headache  and  visual  disturbance  to
diabetes insipidus and hypopituitarism if the hypothalamic-pituitary portal system
is disrupted or normal pituitary tissue is destroyed by the adenoma. The primary
treatment for Nelson’s syndrome is trans-sphenoid surgery.
Material and Method
This is a case report revealing the medical history and endocrine profile of a male
with NS.
Case data
A 65-year old male patient, who had undergone total bilateral suprarenalectomy
in 1987, for refractory CS is admitted in 2015 for periodic check-up a NS. In 1988
he  received  external  radiation-therapy  for  the  pituitary  ACTH-secreting
mesadenoma. In 2003, pituitary MRI performed pointed an 8/10/12 mm-sized
mass of oval shape, with intra-sellar expansion. In 2010 a progressive form of NS
was diagnosed based on ACTH level of 1250 pg/ml (N: 7.2-62.3 pg/ml) with
increasing levels of
2000 pg/ml within 4 years and treated with radiation-
theraphy. The eye exam was normal.
On  admission,  the  associated  conditions  are  hypothyroidism  after  total
thyroidectomy  for  benign  nodular  goiter,  diabetes  mellitus  and  high  blood
pressure. He has been treated with daily Levothyroxine, Prednison, Fludro-
cortisone and oral anti-diabetic agents. The ACTH level continues to be high
(of 715 pg/ml) but decreased compared to previous admissions. Close imagery,
endocrine, ophthalmic follow-up is necessary.
Conclusion
The therapeutically resources in mild forms of Nelson’s syndrome involves
pituitary radiotherapy if surgery is not an option. Despite the current rarity of the
condition is has a potential aggressive behavior and close monitoring is required
including 28 years after bilateral adrenal remove as seen in this case.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP936
EP937
Trial design of a phase III, multicentre, randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, 48-week study to evaluate the safety and efficacy
of osilodrostat in patients with Cushing’s disease
Richard A Feelders1, Anthony Heaney2, Karen McBride3, Annie Hilliard3,
Chuan Tian3, Nicholas Sauter3 & Richard J Auchus4
1Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrine Section, Erasmus Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;2Department of Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California-Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA, USA;3Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East
Hanover, NJ, USA;4MEND/Internal Medicine and Pharmacology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Background
Osilodrostat is an oral inhibitor of 11b-hydroxylase (CYP11B1), the enzyme that
catalyses the final step in cortisol biosynthesis. In a 22-week, phase II study,
osilodrostat treatment normalised mean urinary free cortisol (mUFC) in 78.9%
(15/19) of patients with uncontrolled Cushing’s disease and was well tolerated.
The present phase 3 study is designed to confirm the safety and efficacy of
osilodrostat in patients with uncontrolled Cushing’s disease.
Methods
Patients:  Adults  with  Cushing’s  disease
(persistent,  recurrent  or  de  novo
Cushing’s disease, if not surgical candidates) with mUFC O 1.3 times upper
limit  of  normal
(ULN).  Design:  A  pivotal,  phase  III,  global,  multicentre,
randomised study to enrol 69 patients. Period 1 (week 0-12): double-blind,
placebo-controlled; patients will start receiving either osilodrostat 2 mg bid or
placebo 2 mg bid (2:1 randomisation). Dose adjustments to normalise UFC or
address safety issues, ranging between 1 mg qod and 20 mg bid are allowed.
Period 2 (week 13-48): single-arm, open-label; patients on placebo or osilodrostat
dose R 2 mg bid during week 12 will begin period 2 with osilodrostat 2 mg bid,
those on ! 2 mg bid will continue with their most recent dose. Dose escalation is
permitted up to 30 mg bid. Endpoints: Primary: Proportion of randomised patients
with a complete response (mUFC %ULN) at week 12. Key secondary: Proportion
of patients with mUFC%ULN at week 36 for patients who have received
osilodrostat treatment at any time. Others: Safety and tolerability; changes in
cardiovascular and metabolic parameters, bone mineral density, and quality of
life.
Conclusion
The present study design combines a 12-week placebo-controlled period, which
allows blinded, placebo-controlled assessments with an open-label period to
allow long-term evaluation of efficacy and safety of osilodrostat in patients with
Cushing’s disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP937
EP938
Tolosa Hunt syndrome involving the pituitary: a case report
Sefika Burcak Polat1, Oya Topaloglu1, Ercan Bal2, Reyhan Ersoy1 &
Bekir C¸ akır1
1Yildirim Beyazit University, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Department, Ankara, Turkey;2Yildirim
Beyazit University, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Neurosurgery
Department, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Tolosa Hunt syndrome (THS) is described as unilateral orbital pain associated
with paresis of one or more of the third, fourth and/or sixth cranial nerves caused
by a granulomatous inflammation in the cavernous sinus, superior orbital fissure
or  orbit.  Pituitary  gland  is  rarely  involved  in  this  syndrome.  Herein  we
represented a case with hypophysitis with Tolosa Hunt who was operated with
the suspicion of pituitary adenoma.
Case
A 63-year-old female patient with diabetes history admitted to our clinics with the
complaints of weight gain and headache. In the physical examination, BMI was
40 kg/m2 and there was buffalo hump, central obesity and acanthosis nigricans.
With the suspicion of Cushing syndrome, biochemical screening was performed
with low dose dexamethasone suppression test and free cortisol in 24-hour-urine
collection. Serum cortisol after 1 mg dexamethasone suppression was 2.2 mg/dl
whereas free urinary cortisol was normal. For exclusion of pseudocushing, we
performed 2 days 2 mg dexamethasone suppression with CRH and the result was
equivocal (cortisol after CRH: 1.5 mg/dl). Her ACTH value was 20 pg/ml, and
high dose dexamethasone test result was consistent with Cushing’s disease. In the
CRH test there was %300 increase in ACTH and %100 increase in cortisol after
the administration of CRH. In the pituitary MRI, a lesion 1.8 cm in size was
reported. While the evaluation was going on, the severity of headache was
increased and ophtalmoplegia developed. The patient underwent endoscopic
transsphenoidal surgery. The histopathology of the lesion was consistent with
granulamatous reaction with caseous necrosis. Tuberculosis and sarcoidosis was
excluded by PPD, thorax CT, lumbar puncture and analysis of the cerebrospinal
fluid,  mycobacterium  tuberculosis  PCR  and  the  culture  of  the  pathology
specimen. The final diagnosis was Tolosa Hunt.
Conclusion
Tolosa Hunt is a very rare cause of hypophysitis and panhypopituitarism. It
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a sellar mass.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP938
EP939
Clinical features of thyrotropin secreting pituitary adenomas
Ayse Kubat Uzum, Hulya Dogru, Ozlem Soyluk Selcukbiricik, Nurdan Gul,
Refik Tanakol & Ferihan Aral
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Introduction
Thyrotropin-secreting  pituitary  adenomas
(TSHomas)  are  a  rare  cause  of
hyperthyroidism and represent !1% of all pituitary adenomas. The majority of
TSHomas (70%) secrete TSH alone, while mixed adenomas are not infrequent.
Design
Herein, we reported the findings of six patients with TSHoma (mean age 44 yr,
4 female, 2 male). Mean TSH value was 15.1 mIU/L (3.3-38.0) who were
followed-up in our department.
Results
Symptoms of hyperthyroidism were the initial findings in all these patients. Three
of them recieved high dose antithyroid drugs for hyperthyroidism, Because of
unresponsiveness,  radioactive  iodine
(nZ1)  or  thyroidectomy
(nZ2) was
performed  as  a  definitive  treatment  for  hyperthyroidism  before  the  correct
diagnosis of TSHoma. The diagnosis delayed for 3-11 years. Four of the patients
secrete TSH alone, while three of them were mixed adenomas [TSH, growth
hormone (GH) (nZ1); TSH, GH and prolactin (nZ1); TSH, prolactin (nZ1)].
Five of the cases had macroadenoma invading sphenoid and/or cavernous sinuses,
and two of them also showed compression on optic tractus, one patient had
microadenoma. The primary therapeutic approach was transsphenoidal surgery.
İmmunohistochemically, GH, prolactin and TSH positivity was evident in two
patients  and  one  also  showed  diffuse  Pit1
positivity.  One  patient  showed
positivity, for TSH and prolactin and another showed focal immunostaining for
GH and FSH.
No remission was noted in four patients and medical therapy with somatostatin
analogues (SSAs) and thereafter cabergoline were started. Radiotherapy was
performed for one patient postoperatively. Hormonal control was achieved in all
treated patients.
Conclusion
The delayed diagnosis of TSHoma usually cause inappropriate treatment of
hyperthyroidism. Transsphenoidal surgery should be the first line treatment. If
remission is not achieved medical therapy with SSAs and cabergoline and also
radiotherapy should be options.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP939
EP940
A novel case of pituitary metastasis presented as the syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone: an unexpected association
Sayid Shafi Zuhur1, Idris Kuzu2, Rumeysa Selvinaz Erol2 &
Yuksel Altuntas2
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Namik Kemal University
School of Medicine, Tekirdag, Turkey;2Sisli Etfal Training and Research
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Although the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) has
connection with various malignant tumors, the pituitary metastasis of malignant
tumors are generally associated with diabetes insipidus.
Case report
A 59 years old male patient presented to emergency service with frequent syncope
attacks, nausea, loss of appetite and fatigue that began 2 weeks prior to admission.
Marked obtundation was found on physical examination. The patient had not any
history  or  symptom  consistent  with  lung  disease.  However,  other  physical
examinations including vital signs were normal. Serum sodium was 100 mEq/l,
potassium 4.6 mEq/l, creatinine 0.81 mg/dl, urea 29 mg/dl, uric acid 2.1 mg/dl,
glucose 101 mg/dl, TSH: 0.01U/l (0.4-4), free T4: 0.94 ng/dl (0.9-1.8), free T3:
1.7
pg/ml (1.8-3.8), FSH: 0.3 mIU/ml, LH: 0.1 mIU/ml, total testosterone
!20 ng/dl (230-400), cortisol: 6 mcg/dl, ACTH: 6 pg/ml, IGF-1: 68 ng/ml, urine
sodium 126 mmol/l and plasma osmolality was 240 mOsmol/kg, on laboratory
examination. The patient was diagnosed as panhypopituitarism and SIADH. The
low serum cortisol levels did not respond to short synacthen test. A pituitary mass
of 30!16!18 mm in size was found on pituitary MRI. A complet right side
vision loss was present on visual field examination. The patient underwent
pituitary  surgery.  The  histopathological  and  immunohistochemistry  results
revealed SCLC metastasis. A mass of 41!36 mm in size was determined on
the apicoposterior segment of the left upper lung lobe on chest CT and widespread
metastasis was found on FDG/PET CT, including pituitary gland. The result of
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
lung needle biopsy was consistent with small cell lung cancer. The SIADH in this
case was thought to be associated with SCLC. The patient died two months after
first diagnosis.
Conclusions
Although associated with low survival rates, the presence of metastasis should
always be thought in elderly and middle aged patients diagnosed with non-
functioning pituitary tumors, irrespective of clinical presentation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP940
EP941
The relationship between pituitary hormone levels and magnetic
resonance imaging findings in diabetes insipidus patients
Ramazan Ates1, Meral Mert2, Melih Macit1, Musa Cirak3, Ozlem Polat1 &
Sadik Sami Hatipoglu4
1Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educational and Research Hospital, Family
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey;2Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educational and
Research Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Istanbul, Turkey;
3Bakikoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educational and Research Hospital, Neurosurgery,
Istanbul, Turkey;4Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Educational and Research
Hospital, Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Diabetes insipidus (di) is a water metabolism disorder caused by antidiuretic
hormone  pathologies. In this  study,  we  evaluated,  retrospectively,  pituitary
hormone profiles and pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (mri) findings of
patients with di.
Material and methods
After local ethic committee approval, 300 patients were evaluated retrospectively.
Patients with a history of pituitary surgery and/or radiotherapy were excluded.
Luteinizing hormone (lh), follicule stimulating hormone (fsh), estradiol (e2),
prolactin (prl), total testosterone
(tt), thyroid stimulating hormone (tsh), free
thyroxine (ft4), free triiodothyronine (ft3), creatinine, sodium, potassium levels
and mri findings were recorded. Totally data of 34 patients were evaluated. Spss
20.0 was used for statistical analysis.
Results
24 female (%70.6) and 10 male (%29.4) patients were included into the study.
Potassium  levels  were  found  significantly  related  with  fsh
(PZ0.011), lh
(PZ0.030) and posterior pituitary brightness loss in mri (PZ0.027). Ft3 was
significantly associated with pituitary height (PZ0.015) and posterior pituitary
brightness  loss
(PZ0.027). Moreover, ft4
was  found  significantly  related
with pituitary stalk thickness (PZ0.025) and posterior pituitary brightness loss
(PZ0.007). Glucose, urea, creatinine and urinary osmolality were found
significantly different between male and female patients. Urea, creatinine, glucose
and urinary osmolality values were found higher in men by comparison women.
Conclusıon
Hormonal levels, biochemical levels and imaging techniques are used together for
the diagnosis of di. The interrelation between these tests should be taken into
consideration while evaluating patients who are suspected as di because the
pathologies of the laboratory tests can sometimes give clues about the pathologies
of the imaging studies.
Keywords: diabetes insipidus, pituitary hormones, pituitary magnetic resonance
imaging
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP941
EP942
A rare case of acromegaly concomitant with pancreatic
adenocarcinoma
Senay Arikan Durmaz1, Askin Gungunes1, Dilek Oguz2, Selim Yalcin3 &
Nesrin Turhan4
1Department of Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Kirikkale University,
Kirikkale, Turkey;2Department of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine,
Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey;3Department of Oncology, School
of Medicine, Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey;4Department of
Pathology, Turkey High-Specialty Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Background and aim
Acromegaly is a rare endocrine disease and is associated with an increased
prevalence of colorectal cancer and pre-malignant tubular adenomas, and also
may be associated with other organ malignancies such as breast and thyroid. We
report a rare case of acromegaly concomitant with adenocarcinoma arising from
pancreas.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Case report
A 52-year-old man who was diagnosed with acromegaly two years ago referred
our outpatient clinic. After diagnosis, transsphenoidal surgery was performed.
Surgery was not reduced serum growht hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) to normal, therefore somatostatin analog treatment was started.
After this treatment, glucose-suppressed GH concentration was !1.0 ng/ml and
serum IGF-1 concentration normal for age and gender. He was admitted to out-
patient clinic with abdominal pain about 1 month ago. Abdomen CT showed that
44X26 mm mm mass lesion in the body and tail of the pancreas and multiple
metastatic lesions in the liver. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy
showed that erosive gastritis and polyps in the colon, respectively. After these
imaging studies, endoscopic ultrasound-guided needle aspiration biopsy was
performed to the mass lesions in the tail of the pancreas. Pathological examination
revealed a adenocarcinoma arising from the pancreas.
Conclusions
The patients with acromegaly have an increased risk of benign and malignant
neoplasms, These situation may be related with increased circulating levels of
IGF-1 because of proliferative and anti-apoptotic activity of IGF-1.It is important
to consider pancreatic adenocarcinoma in the presence of acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP942
EP943
Complete pituitary regression with immunosupressive treatment in a
patient with ANCA negative wegener granulomatosis
Fatih Kilicli1, Hatice Dokmetas1, Zeynep Kaya2 & Ekrem Cengiz3
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Istanbul Medipol
University, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul
Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey;3Department of Chest Disease,
Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Wegener granulomatosis is a necrotizing granulomatous small-vessel vasculitis.
It typically affects the upper respiratory tract, lungs, and kidneys but can involve
virtually any organ including the pituitary. Pituitary involvement in wegener
granumatosis is rare.
Case
A 50-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with severe dyspne for 2 years
and stridor for a month. During her hospitalization, her sodium level was noted to
be  persistently  high.  A  further  workup  revealed  a  consistently  low  urine
osmolality in the presence of high serum osmolality suggesting partially diabetes
insipidus. Her baseline laboratory data showed Na 164 mEq/l (135-145 mEq/l),
serum osmolality 351 mOsm/kg (285-295 mOsm/kg), and urine osmolality
232 mOsm/kg. The results were consistent with partial CDI. Her serum sodium
level  was  corrected  with  increased  free  water  intake  and  did  not  require
desmopressin. Anterior pituitary functions were normal at presentation. MRI
revealed  enlargement  of  the  whole  pituitary,  including  the  stalk,  with
heterogeneous gadolinium enhancement and a disappearance of the high signal
intensity of the posterior pituitary. (Figure 1). Computed tomography showed
thickened mucosa of the nasal sinus and multiple small nodular lesions in the
lung. A nasal sinus biopsy revealed a pauci-immune focal segmental necrotizing
sinusitis. She was diagnosed with wegener granulomatosis. Serology revealed
negative  ANCA,  and  the  C-reactive  protein
(CRP)  was  elevated.  No
abnormalities were noted upon urine examination. Intravenous pulse methyl-
prednisolone 1000 mg was administered for 3 days and then cyclophosphamide
was given at a dose 1000 mg monthly for 3 months. A repeat brain MRI 4 months
later showed complete resolution (Figure 2).
Conclusion
We think that pituitary enlargement in wegener granulomatosis can disappear
totally with immuno supressive agents in some patients.
Keywords: wegener granulomatosis, pituitary mass, immuno supressive agents
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP943
EP944
The prevalence of metabolic syndrome in adult patients with
long-standing hypopituitarism who receive adequate supplemental
therapy
Agnieszka Zwolak1,2, Joanna Swirska1,2, Marta Dudzinska1,
Maria Kurowska2, Jadwiga Daniluk1 & Jerzy S Tarach2
1Chair of Internal Medicine and Department of Internal Medicine in
Nursing, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland;2Department of
Endocrinology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Hypopituitarism  is  characterized  by  the  absence  of  pituitary  hormones.
Depending on what pituitary hormones are missing and what is the etiology of
hypopituitarism, its clinical manifestation varies. Apart from evident symptoms
and signs of hypopituitarism due to hormonal insufficiencies, several studies
reveal that long-standing hypopituitarism, including particularly absence of GH,
is related to higher risk of metabolic syndrome.
Objective
The aim of the study was to asses the prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MS) in
patients with long-standing pituitary hormones deficiency who receive adequate
supplemental therapy, including GH treatment.
Material and methods
12 patients (5 males, 7 females), aged 18-40 years, with hypopituitarism who did
receive GH supplemental therapy under the care of Chair and Department of
Endocrinology  Medical  University  of  Lublin
(Poland)  from
01.01.2011
to
31.12.2015 were enrolled into the study. 9 patients had panhypopituitarism, 2
patients  had  isolated  GH  deficiency,
1 patient  had  deficiency  of  GH  and
gonadotropins. The recognition of MS among examined patients was based on
criteria of IDF/NHLBI/AHA-2009.
Results
5 patients (41.7%) met criteria of metabolic syndrome. All these patients had
panhypopituitarism with diabetes insipidus diagnosed in 4 of them. The 4 patients
with diabetes insipidus had the most severe obesity. None of the patients with
isolated GH deficiency or with GH and gonadotropins and GH deficiency met MS
criteria.
Conclusion
Despite adequate supplemental therapy, panhypopituitarism is a risk factor of
obesity and MS suggesting the role of other factors (hypothalamic leisure?) in the
development of the above metabolic complications.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP944
EP945
Sudden global health impairment in a male patient- could it be
hypohysitis?
Anamaria Bursuc1, Alina Daniela Belceanu1, Ioana Armasu1,
Georgiana Andreea Constantinescu1, Anda Esanu2, Carmen Manciuc3,
Felicia Crumpei2 & Carmen Vulpoi1
1Department of Endocrinology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Gr.
T. Popa’, Iasi, Romania;2Department of Radiology, University of Medicine
and Pharmacy ‘Gr. T. Popa’, Iasi, Romania;3Department of Infectious
Diseases, University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Gr. T. Popa’, Iasi,
Romania.
Introduction
Hypophysitis is a chronic inflammatory condition of the pituitary gland which
typically presents with hypopituitarism and a pituitary mass. The disease is rare,
with an estimated incidence of 1/9000000. Most reported cases are in women
during peripartum period and only approximately 15% of reported cases occur
in males.
Case report
Male patient, aged 57, smoker, with a history of hypertension, just returned from
India, presented with anorexia, important asthenia, somnolence, weight loss (5 kg
in 2 months), decreased blood pressure (110/80 mmHg without treatment), and
fever. Investigations for a parasitosis were negative and the ultrasonographical
detection of a nodular goiter determined an endocrinologic consultation. The
diagnosis of secondary hypothyroidism (TSHZ0.102 mIU/ml, fT4Z0.558 ng/dl)
together  with  the  clinical  picture  raised  the  supposition  of  a  pituitary
insufficiency,  confirmed  by  the  multiple  hormonal  deficiency:  FSHZ1.22
mIU/ml,  LHZ0.477  mIU/ml,  testosterone  !0.026  ng/ml;  morning  cortisol
!1 mg/dl with low ACTH (19.7 pg/ml); IGF1Z80.3 ng/ml (81-225 ng/ml).
Pituitary MRI detected a globular, convex and inhomogeneous aspect of the
pituitary gland, with increased dimensions: 9.7/17.9 mm and normal sellar floor,
suggestive for hypophysitis. Corticotherapy was started with rapid improvement
(clinical and biological in 1 month and imagistic in 2 months).
Discussions
Lymphocytic hypophysitis is a rare disease, especially in men. Secondary adrenal
insufficiency is one of the earliest manifestations and can become life threatening.
Although spontaneous remission is possible, in these cases, as it was in our
patient, treatment is preferable. The rapid good evolution sustained the diagnosis
which can often be made on the basic clinical, biological and imagistic features,
pituitary biopsy not being always necessary for effective management of the
disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP945
EP946
Coincidence of subarachnoidal hemorrhage and pituitary apoplexy
Gonca Oruk, Melda Apayadin, Husnu Yilmaz, Nurullah Yuceer &
Baris Pamuk
Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital,
Izmir, Turkey.
Pituitary  apoplexy  is  a  rare  and  life-threatening  disorder  often  requiring
emergency neurosurgical intervention to preserve vision and prevent cerebral
herniation syndrome. Infarction or hemorrhage of an enlarged pituitary gland or
pituitary tumor is the most common cause of pituitary apoplexy. Early recognition
of this disorder is essential for preventing permanent visual loss or death;
however, pituitary apoplexy often mimics subarachnoid hemorrhage, which in
some cases may delay definitive diagnosis.
44 years old male patient was admitted to Emergency outpatient clinic with
intense headache. He was discharged from the hospital after an administration of
analgesic injection. But his mental status started to deteriorate at home and there
were complaints of of blurring of vision with diplopia and drooping of the left
eyelid. His headache was also persisting with same intensity. History of the
patient revealed celiac disease. During second admission to the hospital, the
patient was pale, pulse was 110/min, and blood pressure recorded was 90/50
mmHg. On examination, ptosis was present on left side, periorbital swelling was
also observed. Restriction of medial/upward movement of both eyes were present.
Pupils were bilateral equal and normally reacting to light.Visual acuity was 0.4 on
right and 0.05 on the left side. The rest of the neurological examination and
review of other systems were normal. Laboratory investigations were compatible
with panhypopituitarism. The patient was started on hydrocortisone and thyroid
hormone replacement therapy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) established
diagnosis of pituitary apoplexy and subarachnoid hemorrhage due to acute
hemorrhage of a 32!20!32 mm sized pituitary adenoma. MR angiography did
not establish an artery aneurysm. His status and hemorrhage recovered with the
treatment given. He is going to be operated for the pituitary adenoma.
Multidisciplinary evaluation of these patients will determine diagnosis and the
most  appropriate  emergency  treatment  plan  and  long-term  management
strategies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP946
EP947
A case of acromegaly presenting with lacrimal gland hypertrophy
Mehtap Cakir
Kent Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
Introduction
Acromegaly is a chronic endocrine disorder caused by excess growth hormone
(GH) secretion. Hypersecretion of GH causes increased IGF-1 secretion from the
liver which in turn leads to a series of multisystemic complications including
somatic overgrowth and multiple comorbidities.
Case report
Thirty-nine-year-old female patient was seen in ophthalmology outpatient clinic
with the complaint of a mass inside the right upper eyelid. On ophthalmologic
examination a 10x10 mm mass was noted inside the lateral part of the right upper
eyelid and an orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was planned with a
preliminary diagnosis of lacrimal gland cyst/tumor. MRI revealed a 16!8!10
mm pituitary mass expanding the sella, extending to the right cavernous sinus
deviating infindibulum to the left. The patient was referred to the endocrinology
outpatient clinic. On medical history her periods had stopped one month ago.
When questioned she mentioned that she was snoring during sleep and her shoe
size had increased from 38 to 39. On physical examination she had prognatism,
deep nasolabial folds and a conjuctival mass inside right upper eyelid was noted.
On laboratory evaluation, her IGF-1 level was 275 (normal range: 66-240) ng/ml.
On 75 gram oral glucose load, fasting and 2-hour plasma glucose level was 97 and
126 mg/dl, respectively, while baseline and 2-hour serum GH level was 1.98 and
1.05
ng/ml,  respectively.  The  patient  had  pituitary  adenomectomy  and
immunohistochemical analysis of the pathology specimen was compatible with
GH-secreting pituitary adenoma.
Conclusions
Hypersecretion of GH may cause somatic overgrowth and these patients may
present with several different clinical or metabolic features. Regarding eye
involvement in acromegaly there is a previous report of a patient with restrictive
extraocular myopathy and another report with epiphora and proptosis. This is the
first case report in English literature regarding lacrimal gland hypertrophy as a
presenting complaint in acromegaly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP947
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP948
Frequency and predictive factors of acute adrenal insufficiency
following brain injury
Bensalah Meriem1, Cherfi Lyes2, Abdennebi Aissa3, Guenane Mustapha4,
Kemali Zahra1 & Ould Kablia Samia1
1Endocrinology Department, Central Hospital of Army, Algiers, Algeria;
2Intensive Care Unit, Central Hospital of Army, Algiers, Algeria;
3Neurosurgery Department, Zemirli Hospital, Algiers, Algeria;4Intensive
Care Unit, Zemirli Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Background
Biological diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency (AI) is very difficult in the setting of
critical illness like in traumatic brain injury (TBI), and the cut off defining AI need
more precision.
Aim
The aim is to assess the frequency and predictive factors of AI in a simple of 277
victims of moderate to severe BI in two neighbors’ hospitals in the east of Algiers.
Method
Between November 2009 and December 2013, 277 patients victims of moderate
to severe TBI aged from 18-65 years old were included.During the acute post
injury period (0-7 days), the measurement of serum cortisol has been done in all
patients at 8-9 pm. TBI subjects were defined as having AD using three cut offs:
83 nmol/ (the value that indicate severe AI usually admitted by endocrinologists),
276 nmol/l (the value indicating AI in critical illness according to the consensus
statements from an international task force by the American college of critical
care medicine), 414 nmol/(the value admitted by Hannon and al which indicate AI
in victims of TBI). Variables studied were: age, severity of BI, duration of
intubation and coma, pupillary status,presence of hypotension and anemia (Hb!
9 dg/ml). CT findings were classified according to Marshall Classification, the
presence of skull base fracture was assessed. The presence of insipidus diabetes,
the kind of medications used for sedation has been assessed in intubated patients.
The outcome was evaluated by the GOCS.
Result
Mean age was 32 years with male predominance. Traffic accident was the most
frequent cause of brain injury The frequency of acute AD was 2.8% 20.21% and
35.37% respectively for cortisol levels of 83 nmol/l.276 nmol/l and 415 nmol/l
respectively. Predictive factors for its occurrence was the acute diastolic blood
pressure,  prescription  of  Pentobarbital,  acute  insipidus  diabetes,  skull  base
fracture and the presence of intraparenchymal hematoma but at different levels of
cortisol.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP948
EP949
High monocyte/HDL-cholesterol ratio in men with hypogonadotrophic
hypogonadism
Kenan 
¸ adırcı1, Havva Keskin2, S¸ enay Durmaz3, Abdulmuttalip Arslan1,
Hakan Sevimli1 & Ay¸e 
¸ arlıo
˘lu1
1Department of İnternal Medicine, Erzurum Training and Research
Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of İnternal Medicine, Goztepe
Training and Research Hospital, Medeniyet University, Istanbul, Turkey;
3Department of İnternal Medicine, Kırıkkale University, Kırıkkale, Turkey.
Aim
In a previous study, we demonstrated elevated mean platelet volume in isolated
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism (IHH) is associated with high cardiovascular
risk. Monocyte  count/HDL-cholesterol ratio
(MHR) is a new inflammatory
marker showing cardiovascular risk. The purpose of this study is to evaluate
(MHR) in men with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism.
Method
This study includes 31 men with isolated hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
without previous treatment (mean age 22.5G7.2 year; BMI 21.6G4.9 kg/m2) and
44 healthy men who have similar age and BMI (mean age 22.9G6.4 years; BMI
(19.5G3.2 kg/m2). HH was defined as total testosterone being below 229 ng/dl
because of the absence or inadequacy of hypophyseal gonadotropins Hormonal
biochemical and hematological parameters were measured by automatic analyzer
after 12 h fasting.
Results
In our data, we detected statistically significant differences in total testosterone
level (mean total testosterone levels 43.9G43.9 ng/dl in HH group vs 524.6G
275.1 ng/dl in control group, respectively, PZ0.000).
There was no statistically a significant difference between HH group and control
group(mean HDL-C 49.3G16.6 mg/dl in HH group vs 46.7G8.3 mg/dl in control
group, respectively, PZ0.7), monocyte count (mean monocyte count 0.5G
0.3/mm3 in HH group vs. 0.6G0.2/mm3 in control group, respectively, PZ0.2)
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
and MHR (mean MHR 0.015G0.014 in HH group vs 0.081G0.4 in control
group, respectively, PZ0.57). MHR also was not correlated with hematological
parameters and total testosterone.
Conclusions
HH may not be a parameter that can be used for evaluation of monocyte
count/HDL-cholesterol, cardiovascular risk in men.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP949
EP950
Ketoconazole in Cushing’s disease management
Sofia Oliveira1,2, João Neves1,2, Celestino Neves1,2, Sandra Belo1,2,
Paula Freitas1,2, Duarte Pignatelli1,2, José Castedo1,2, Eduardo Vinha1,2,
Ana Oliveira1,2 & Davide Carvalho1,3
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism of Centro
Hospitalar de São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal;2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Instituto de Investigac¸ão e Inovação em Saúde,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Background
Transphenoidal surgery is still the best initial therapy for Cushing’s disease (CD),
with  a  high  probability  of  cure  and  few  risks  or  complications.  However,
pharmacotherapy has a role as primary or adjunctive therapy: when surgery is
delayed, in case of postoperative persistence or recurrence of hypercortisolism, or
while waiting for radiotherapy effectiveness. Ketoconazole, a steroidogenesis
inhibitor, is nowadays the main drug used to CD control by reducing cortisol levels,
with potent antisecretory efficacy in majority of cases, and relatively rare major side
effects (anaphylaxis and fulminant hepatitis), but its use remains controversial.
Objective
The present study aims to assess the efficacy and tolerance of ketoconazole in CD
and evaluate the benefit/risk balance.
Patients and methods
We reviewed ten present cases of CD treated with ketoconazole in our center, with
a mean follow-up of 16G15.3 months (0.25-40). Clinical assessment included age,
gender distribution, BMI, blood pressure, levels of serum cortisol and ACTH,
urinary free cortisol (UFC), hepatic function, lipid profile, glucose and HbA1c
levels, hypokalemia and GI tolerance.
Results
The mean age of the participants was 43.7G13.01 years, 80% females, with a BMI
of 29G6.2 kg/m2. Eight patients (80%) are receiving the drug for 3-40 months,
with a mean final dose of 500G270.8 mg. One patient suspended treatment after
1week due to GI intolerance and another one after 13 months due to an infectious
intercurrence. At the last follow-up, 60% of patients had normal UFC levels, 50%
had at least a 50% decrease and 10% had unchanged UFC levels. Increase in liver
enzymes was generally mild and reversible (90%), with 1 (10%) case of major
increase. No fatal hepatitis was observed.
Conclusion
Ketoconazole  is  a  safe  and  efficacious  drug  in  CD,  but  has  the  potential
hepatotoxicity that requires careful selection of patients and subsequent clinical and
biochemical monitoring.
Keywords:  Cushing’s  disease,  ketoconazole,  steroidogenesis  inhibitors,
hypercortisolism
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP950
EP951
Primary empty sella syndrome-is it familial?
Pratibha Machenahalli & Kevin Shotliff
Chelsea and Westminister Hospital, London, UK.
Introduction
Empty sella syndrome is a condition in which sella turcica is partially or
completely filled with CSF resulting in a displacement of normal pituitary gland.
Primary empty sella is due to inherent weakness of diaphragm sella or to an
increase  in  intracranial  pressure  which  promotes  herniation  of  arachnoid
membranes in to pituitary fossa. More common in middle aged obese female
and headache is the most common presenting symptom. It may be associated with
one or more pituitary hormone deficiency.
There no familial association in the aetiology of empty sella has been described in
the literature. We would like to present cases of mother and daughter who
presented with primary empty sella.
49-years-old lady with a background of type 2 diabetes, obstructive sleep apnoea,
asthma, osteoarthritis, obesity presented to neurologists in 2009 with a history of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
recurrent headaches, no history of head injury. In her family there was a history of
strokes and migraine. Neurological examination was normal. MRI of the brain
revealed primary empty sella. A GnRH test revealed normal gonadotropin axis.
Insulin tolerance test has revealed growth hormone deficiency. She has been
commenced on growth hormone replacement. Six years after commencing the
growth hormone replacement, a glucogan stress test has revealed a subnormal
cortisol response.
34-year-old daughter (a neuropsychologist) of the above lady presented to the
endocrine services with a history of weight gain, hair loss. She had a background
of renal stones, endometrial polyp. Partial empty sella was diagnosed on MRI
done when she participated in research. Pituitary dynamic function test have
revealed growth hormone deficiency with hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis
and gonadotropin axis intact.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP951
EP952
A case of post-traumatic ACTH deficiency followed by Cushing
syndrome prediagnosis
Suheyla Gorar1, Esra Nur Ademoglu2, Suleyman Dolu3 & Seyit Uyar3
1Department of Endocrinology, Antalya Training and Research Hospital,
Antalya, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinolgy, Bolu University, Bolu,
Turkey;3Department of Internal Medicine, Antalya Training and Research
Hospital, Antalya, Turkey.
Pituitary ACTH deficiency is one cause of secondary adrenal insufficiency.
Genetic factors, autoimmunity, infiltrative disease, cranial trauma can cause
ACTH deficiency. Hyperpigmented skin lesions are expected in primary adrenal
insufficiency while they are very rare in secondary adrenal insufficiency. Striae
are characterized by linear smooth bands of atrophic appearing skin. They are
mostly associated with obesity, pregnancy, hypercortisolism/Cushing syndrome.
Striae are not an expected finding in hypocortisolemia. A 34-year-old male
patient, referred to the endocrinology clinic for the evaluation of red-purple
colored striae on both armpits. The case self-reported that the skin lesions
appeared w4 months ago and spread over time, and occurred also on his
abdomen. He did not have history of any chronic disease or drug therapy; but had
cranial operation twice 12 years ago due to a car accident, and an arterial
embolization procedure due to internal carotid artery aneurysm a year later. On
his physical examination was normal. Hematologic, biochemical, and hormonal
tests were measured. Plasma ACTH (1.6 pg/ml) and cortisol (0.18 mg/dl) levels
were low. For evaluation of HPA axis, cosyntrophin, TRH and LH-RH tests were
conducted.  The  patient  responded  to  TRH
(basal:
2.86 mIU/ml,  max:
10.43 mIU/ml) and LH-RH (basal: 3.25 mIU/ml, max: 12.30 mIU/ml) stimulation
tests. However, in the standard ACTH stimulation test, adrenal gland could have a
suboptimal cortisol response (basal: 0.22 mg/dl; max 8.30 mg/dl). There were no
abnormalities on the adrenal and pituitary MR images. However, secondary
defects due to cranial trauma were seen in cranial MR. Based on the laboratory
and MR examinations, the case was considered a posttraumatic ACTH deficiency
case that developed as a result of head trauma and intracranial operations. We
presented case of posttraumatic ACTH deficiency with hypocortisolemia after we
investigated suspect hypercortisolemia/Cushing syndrome due to striae.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP952
Steroid metabolism C action
EP953
Sex hormones and sleep in men and women from the general
population: a cross-sectional observational study
Hanna Kische1, Ralf Ewert2, Ingo Fietze3, Stefan Gross4,5,
Henri Wallaschofski1,4, Henry Volzke4,6, Marcus Dorr4,5,
Matthias Nauck1,4, Anne Obst2,6, Beate Stubbe2, Thomas Penzel3 &
Robin Haring1,7
1Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University
Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany;2Department of Internal
Medicine B, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany;
3Interdisciplinary Sleep Center, Charité, University Medicine Berlin, Berlin,
Germany;4DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner
Site Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany;5Department of Cardiology,
University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany;6Institute for
Community Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald,
Germany;7Faculty of Applied Public Health, European University of
Applied Sciences, Rostock, Germany.
Introduction
To date, associations between sex hormones and sleep were mainly investigated
in small and selected patient-based samples. Thus, we examined a comprehensive
panel  of  mass  spectrometry-measured  sex  hormones  and  various  sleep
characteristics in a population-based sample of healthy men and women from
the general population.
Methods
We used data from 204 men and 213 women of the cross-sectional Study of
Health in Pomerania TREND, who underwent cardiorespiratory polysomno-
graphy. Associations of total and free testosterone (TT, fT), androstenedione
(ASD), estrone (E1), estradiol
(E2), DHEAS, sex hormone-binding globulin
(SHBG), and E2/TT ratio with sleep measures (including total sleep time, sleep
efficiency,  wake  after  sleep  onset
(WASO),  apnea-hypopnea  index
(AHI),
insomnia severity index, epworth sleepiness scale (ESS), and Pittsburgh sleep
quality index) were assessed by sex-specific multivariable regression models
adjusting  for  age,  waist  circumference,  hypertension,  smoking,  physical
inactivity, and alcohol consumption. Sensitivity analyses were performed with
stratification by diagnosis of depression and menopausal status (women).
Results
In men, associations of TT (b-coefficient per S.D.: 0.62; 95% CI: 0.46-0.83), fT,
SHBG, and E2/TT ratio with AHI in age-adjusted analyses were rendered
non-significant after multivariable adjustment. In multivariable analyses, ASD
(b-coefficient: 1.37; 95% CI: 1.03-1.82) and SHBG were associated with ESS.
In women, only age-adjusted models showed an inverse association of SHBG
with  AHI  (b-coefficient:
0.55;
95%  CI:  0.38-0.78).  Multivariable  analyses
showed  positive  associations  of  DHEAS  with  WASO
(b-coefficient:
0.16;
95% CI: 0.03-0.28) and of E2 (b-coefficient: 1.04; 95% CI: 0.37-1.72) and E2/TT
ratio with ESS.
Conclusion
Consistent with previous findings, the present cross-sectional population-based
study observed sex-specific associations of testosterone and estrogen with sleep
disturbances and poor sleep quality. However, multivariable-adjusted analyses
confirmed the relative impact of body composition, health-related lifestyle, and
comorbidity on the association between sex hormones and sleep.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP953
EP954
First generation testosterone assays are influenced by sex hormone
binding globulin concentrations as evidenced during oral contraceptive
use and pregnancy
Annemieke Heijboer1, Edo Savelkoul1, Adrian Kruit2, Erik Endert3 &
Marinus Blankenstein1
1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;2Nij
Smellinghe Hospital, Drachten, The Netherlands;3Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Introduction
The quality of testosterone assays has been a matter of debate for several years.
Known limitations of testosterone immunoassays are the cross-reactivity with
other  steroids  and  a  high  variation  in  the  low  concentration  range.  We
hypothesized that one of the additional limitations of testosterone immunoassays
is an ineffective displacement of testosterone from its binding protein.
Methods
Thirty samples from women not using oral contraceptives (OAC), 30 samples
from women using oral contraceptives, and 30 samples from pregnant women
were used to measure testosterone by an ID-LC-MS/MS method and by six
commercially available testosterone immunoassays (Unicel, Architect, Centaur,
Cobas, Immulite and Liaison). In addition, SHBG was measured by immunoassay
(Architect).
Results
The  1st  generation  immunoassays  (Unicel,  Centaur,  Immulite  and Liaison)
showed inaccurate testosterone results in the method comparisons with the
ID-LC-MS/MS method (R between 0.61 and 0.86) and for some assays (Unicel
and  Liaison)  also  a  very  poor  standardization
(slopes  of
0.59
and
0.67,
respectively). On average, SHBG concentrations were lowest in women not
using OAC and highest in pregnant women and overall ranged from 18.5 to
633 nmol/l. In the 1st generation immunoassays, but not in the 2nd generation
immunoassays, we observed an inverse relationship between SHBG concen-
trations and deviations in testosterone from the ID-LC-MS/MS results.
Conclusion
First generation testosterone immunoassays are influenced by SHBG concen-
trations which leads to inaccurate results in samples from subjects with high or
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
low SHBG concentrations, respectively. Laboratory specialists, clinicians, and
researchers should be aware of this limitation in 1st generation testosterone
immunoassays which are still used worldwide.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP954
EP955
Testosterone therapy in female-to-male transsexuals: effects on
gonadotropins, prolactin, gonadal steroids and menstrual cycle
Francisco Javier Martinez Martin1, Sara Quintana Arroyo2, Carmen
Acosta Calero2, Claudia Arnas Leon2 & Ana Delia Santana Suarez2
1Clinica San Roque, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain;2Hospital Doctor
Negrin, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
Introduction and objectives
Testosterone therapy (TT) in female-to-male transsexuals (FMT) usually causes
cessation of menses within the first few months. However the changes in the
hormonal profile are not well known. We set out to analyze the hormonal changes
and menstrual evolution in a cohort of FMT who began TT.
Methodology
Retrospective observational study with no control group in a cohort of 34 FMT
patients who started TT following a standard protocol (target doses were 50 mg
transdermal daily or 250 mg parenteral biweekly) comparing routine hormonal
laboratory data before and after 6-12 months. A menstrual calendar was also
requested from the patients.
Results
Age  was  27G6  years  and  BMI  26.7G3.1 kg/m2.  As  expected,  treatment
increased free testosterone
(0.51G0.18 to 15.5G5.2 ng/dl, P!0.001, paired
t-test) and reduced 17-b-estradiol (118.3G39.4 to 37.9G14.1 pg/ml, P!0.001).
LH and FSH were also reduced (33.7G13.4 to 1.7G0.7 mIU/ml, and 9.9G4.5 to
1.7G0.7 mIU/ml, both P !0.001), while PRL was not significantly changed
(16.6G6.8 to 17.5G7.6 ng/ml, PZ0.155). After the first, second, third, fourth,
fifth and sixth month, 82, 38, 15, 6, 3 and 0% of the patients maintained menses,
although 9% of the patients reported minor spotting and/or abdominal pain after
the sixth month.
Conclusions
Routine TT in our FMT cohort markedly reduced the circulating gonadotropins
but did not totally suppress ovarian function along the first year (17-b-estradiol
was in normal range for cisgender males but not suppressed) and did not cause
hyperprolactinemia. Over 90% of the patients had ceased menstruation after
3 months  and  all  of  them  after  6
months,  except  for  minor disturbances.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate injections are recommended if menses persist, but
none of our FMT patients needed them.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP955
EP956
An estrogen receptor signaling pathway is involved in 3,30 -diindolyl-
methane-induced inhibition of cell migration of MCF-7 breast cancer
caused by triclosan via the regulation of epithelial- mesenchymal
transition
Geum-A Lee, Kyung-Chul Choi & Kyung-A Hwang
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
Triclosan (TCS) is an endocrine-disrupting chemical and has a potential to
increase progression of hormone responsive cancers as does 17b-estradiol (E2).
3,30-diindolylmethane
(DIM),  a  phytoestrogen,  has  been  known  to  have
anticancer activity. In this study, we examined the anti-proliferative and anti-
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) effects of DIM on TCS or E2-induced
EMT of MCF-7 breast cancer cells, which express estrogen receptors (ERs). In
MTT assay, TCS (10-4-10-7 M) induced growth of MCF-7 cells compared to a
control (DMSO) like E2 (a positive control, 10-9 M), which was antagonized by
addition of ICI 182,720 (10-8 M), suggesting that the cell proliferation effect
induced by TCS appears to be mediated by an ER-dependent manner. On the
contrary, DIM (20-50 mM) significantly reduced the increased viability of MCF-7
cells induced by TCS or E2. In a scratch assay, TCS enhanced migration of MCF-
7 cells like E2, but co-treatment of DIM or ICI 182,720 reduced the migration
ability of TCS and E2 to a control level. Next, we measured TCS or E2-induced
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
alterations in mRNA and protein expression levels of EMT related markers, i.e.,
N-cadherin, N-cadherin, snail and slug by reverse transcription (RT)-PCR and
western blot assay. mRNA and protein expression of E-cadherin was declined
while N-cadherin, snail, and slug expressions were increased by TCS or E2,
indicating that TCS induced EMT process in MCF-7 cells like E2. Differently,
DIM was shown to adversely affect the expression of EMT markers induced by
TCS or E2. Taken together, these results present that DIM effectively inhibits the
cell growth and EMT process of MCF-7 cells increased by TCS or E2. Based on
these in vitro results, in vivo effect of TCS and DIM on tumor growth and EMT
process will be examined in a xenografted mouse model transplanted with MCF-7
breast cancer cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP956
EP957
Similarity and differences of maximal and sub-maximal endurance
exercise in increase the serum testosterone and DHT concentrations in
healthy males
Paolo Sgrò1, Massimiliano Sansone2, Francesco Romanelli2, Andrea Lenzi2,
Serena Bianchini1 & Luigi Di Luigi1
1University of Rome ‘Foro Italico’, Rome, Italy;2Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy.
Introduction
Physical exercise exerts several effects on endocrinological homeostasis and, in
particular, sprint exercise elicits the largest testosterone response per unit of work,
while in  response  to prolonged endurance  exercise testosterone  levels  will
typically decline. In contrast to a large amount of paper about the modification of
testosterone  during  physical  exercise  few  study  evaluated  how  DHT  was
influenced by a single bout of aerobic exercise.
Design
Twelve healthy trained male volunteers involved in non-competitive team sports
were included and performed maximal exercise test (MAX) and sub-maximal
exercise test (sMAX) at the individual anaerobic threshold (IAT). One week
before starting the experimental phase, each volunteer underwent a MAX started
with a 1-min warm-up without any added load then the workload was increased
30 w every 3 min until exhaustion. This test was used also to evaluate the IAT and
the maximal oxygen uptake (O2max). The sMAX consisted of pedaling 30 min at
IAT workload. Blood collections were performed immediately before (0-pre)
starting each exercise test, immediately after stopping exercise (0-post), and at
C15, C30, and C60 min during recovery. Following each blood collection the
serum  was  separated  and  stored  at  K308C  until  it  was  assayed  for  total
testosterone (TT) and DHT.
Results
TT increased significantly after  MAX and sMAX from 0-post and remain
elevated till C60. DHT concentration increase significantly after MAX (from
0-post) and remain elevated during all recovery (to C60).
Conclusion
Due to the lack of parallelism increase between TT and DHT in both type of
exercise, we could exclude that the increase of DHT is related to a conversion of
Testosterone by 5 alpha reductase after MAX and we suggest that steroids
increases could represent a specific adaptive response to physiological needs
related to the intensity of aerobic exercise.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP957
EP958
Resting state functional connectivity is affected by testosterone
treatment in female-to-male transgender persons
Nienke Nota, Sarah Burke, Martin den Heijer, Remi Soleman,
Cornelis Lambalk, Dick Veltman, Peggy Cohen-Kettenis &
Baudewijntje Kreukels
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Background
Several resting state networks have been described in literature. Today, it is still
unclear whether these networks are stable or can be influenced by sex hormones.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Transgender  persons  offer  a  unique  opportunity  to  study  these  hormonal
influences.
Objective
To examine the effects of cross-sex hormone treatment in transgender persons on
two resting state networks involved in cognition and emotion, the default mode
network and executive network.
Methods
Resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging and sex hormone levels
were analyzed in 21 female-to-males, 13 male-to-females, 17 untreated control
men  and  12  untreated  control  women
(all  participants  were  aged  R17).
Measurements were done at baseline, when endogenous gonadal stimulation in
the transgender participants was suppressed by a gonadotropin-releasing hormone
analogue,  and  four  months  after  the  start  of  cross-sex  hormone  treatment
(testosterone in female-to-males and estradiol in male-to-females). Independent
component analysis was used to evaluate the effect of cross-sex hormones.
Results
Within the default mode network, female-to-males showed increased functional
connectivity in the right postcentral gyrus four months after starting testosterone
treatment. In the male-to-females and both control groups no differences in
functional connectivity in any of the two networks were observed.
Conclusions
Functional connectivity within the default mode network appears to be affected
by testosterone treatment in female-to-male transgender persons.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP958
EP959
Effect of estradiol on the development of hypoxic pulmonary
hypertension (O2Z13%, 10%, 6%) and blood hematocrit in the female
ovariectomized rats
Natalia Medvedeva & Oleg Medvedev
Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
Objective
The role of sex in pulmonary hypertension (PAH) is not fully known. The
majority of animal studies have suggested a protective role of female sex hormone
in PAH. But women of various ages are more subjected to PAH compared with
male. The aim of current research was to test the hypothesis that the level of
oxygen in the inspired air can influence  on the effect of estradiol on the
development of experimental PAH in female rats.
Methods and design
Female gonadectomized Wistar rats were divided into 6 groups, three from which
were injected subcutaneously during 4 weeks with 1,2-propandion (vehicle,
200 mkl/rat/day, C.); and three groups with estradiol (15 mkg/kg/day E2). The
procedures followed the FELASA/ICLAS guide for use of laboratory animals.
PAH was induced by exposure to hypobaric hypoxia in all 6 groups. 2 groups
(C13, E13) had hypoxia with 13% O2, 2 groups (C10, E10) - 10% O2  and 2
groups (C6, E6) - 6% O2. Rats were housed in a hypobaric chamber 10 h/day,
2wk. Right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) was measured as indices of PAH.
Blood hematocrit (Hmt) were measured using a blood analyser Gemalait 1280.
Results
Chronic estradiol administration in groups with 13% O2  caused a decrease of
RVSP in group E13 on 14.6% compared with C13 (P!0.05). In groups 10%
O2 estradiol did not caused any change in the group of E10 vs. C10. E2 increased
degree of RVSP in group E6 vs C6; (54.8G1.4 vs 46.3G1.1 mm Hg; P!0.01).
E2 decreased Hmt in all groups in the same extent.
Conclusions
Effect of estradiol on the development of hypoxic pulmonary hypertension in the
female ovariectomized rats depends on the degree of hypoxia (O2 13%, 10%, 6%).
Decreasing effect of estradiol on the levels of Hmt does not correlate with the
effect estradiol on the development of hypertension.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP959
EP960
17b-estradiol or triclosan-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and migration of MCF-7 breast cancer cells were reversed by
kaempferol, a phytoestrogen
Geum-A Lee, Kyung-A Hwang & Kyung-Chul Choi
Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea.
As a phytoestrogen, kaempferol plays a chemopreventive role inhibiting cancer
formation and progression. In this study, chemopreventive activity of kaempferol
was  examined  by  measuring  its  effect  on  growth,  epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), and migration of MCF-7 breast cancer cells increased by 17b-
estradiol (E2, a positive control) or triclosan (TCS), an endocrine-disrupting
chemical (EDC). As an EDC, TCS is known to interfere estrogen receptor (ER)
dependent pathway in MCF-7 cells expressing ERs. In MTT assay, TCS (10K4-
10K7 M) or E2 (10K9 M) induced cell growth of MCF-7 cells, which was reversed
to a control level by co-treatment of ICI 182,780 (10K8 M), an ER antagonist, or
kaempferol (50 uM). In a wound-healing scratch assay, TCS enhanced migration
of MCF-7 cells like E2, but co-treatment of kaempferol or ICI 182,720 decreased
the migration ability of MCF-7 cells to a control level. In RT-PCR and western
blot assay, we examined the effect of TCS and DIM on mRNA and protein
expression of EMT-related markers such as E-cadherin, N-cadherin, snail and
slug. TCS induced the increased expression of EMT promoting markers such as
N-cadherin, snail and slug but down-regulated the expression of E-cadherin, an
epithelial marker inhibiting EMT process. On the contrary, kaempferol was
shown to reverse the expression pattern of EMT-related markers induced by TCS
or E2. In conclusion, kaempferol effectively suppressed growth, EMT, and
migration ability of MCF-7 breast cancer cells increased by E2 and TCS.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP960
EP961
Increase in insuline-like growh factor levels during cross-sex hormone
treatment in transgender persons
Nienke Nota, Marieke Dekker, Maartje Klaver, Chantal Wiepjes,
Annemieke Heijboer & Martin den Heijer
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Background
Sex steroids probably stimulate growth-hormone secretion during puberty, which
in turn contributes to the development of gender specific body characteristics.
Hypothetically, adequate growth hormone levels in transgender persons are also
important to achieve the best therapeutic results. The influence of cross-sex
hormone treatment (CHT) at growth-hormone production in adult transgender
persons is not yet elucidated.
Objective
To investigate the influence of CHT on growth-hormone production by the
determination insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) levels.
Methods
This  prospective  study  includes
89  transgender  persons,
43 male-to-female
individuals (MtF’s) and 46 FtM’s (age R18) who started with CHT between
March 2015 and December 2015. MtF’s were treated with cyproterone acetate in
combination with estradiol transdermally or orally. FtM’s were treated with
testosterone transdermally or intramuscular.  Serum IGF-1
and IGF binding
protein 3 (IGFBP-3) levels were determined at baseline and after three of CHT.
IGFBP-3 was determined to calculate the IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratio to estimate the
availability of free IGF-1. IGF-1 was measured using an automated immunoassay
(Liaison, DiaSorin) and IGFBP-3 using an ELISA (DRG).
Results
In MtF’s mean IGF-1 levels increased from 31 nmol/L to 36 nmol/L (16%, 95CI:
11%  to  20%)  between  baseline  and  three  months  of  CHT  and  the  mean
IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratio with 25% (95CI: 17% to 32%). At baseline two MtF’s had
elevated IGF-1 levels (i.e. levels above the upper limit of their age-specific
reference range), which increased to 14 MtF’s after three months of CHT. In
FtM’s mean IGF-1 levels increased from 39 nmol/L to 43 nmol/L (10%, 95CI: 6%
to 15%) and mean IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratio with 28% (95CI: 21% to 37%). The
number of FtM’s with elevated IGF-1 levels increased from nine at baseline to
19 after three months of CHT.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
In both MtF’s and FtM’s IGF-1 levels increased moderately during the first three
months of CHT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP961
EP962
Effects of sex steroid hormone on regulation and localization of the
calcium related genes in rat esophagus
Kipoong Kim, Song Ai Kang, Changhwan Ahn, Tran Dinh Nam &
Eui-Bae Jeung
College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.
Calcium ion is important for physiological functions in all tissues and organs, and
is essential for many vital functions. Calcium in lumen is absorbed to cytosol, and
Calbindin-D9k binds calcium. It can remove calcium to extracellular through
PMCA1 and NCX1. However, in the rat esophagus, the calcium related gene
regulations and localizations were not well documented. We evaluated calcium
related genes including Calbindin-D9k, PMCA1, and NCX1. Immature rats were
daily treated for three days with estradiol, progesterone and vehicle as control. To
evaluate the pathway, antagonist groups were treated with ICI 182,780 and
RU486 before 30min ahead on hormone administration. The mRNA level of
Calbindin-D9k, PMCA1, and NCX1 were quantified by qPCR, protein level and
localization  of Calbindin-D9k, PMCA1, and NCX1 in the esophagus were
identified by immunofluorescence. Calbindin-D9k expression was increased by
E2 and not altered by P4. ICI decreased Calbindin-D9k expression induced by E2,
but no effect was observed in RU compare with P4. PMCA1 expression was
shown  as  opposed  to  the  Calbindin-D9k  expression.  PMCA1
mRNA  was
decreased by E2 and not altered by P4. ICI recovered PMCA1 expression
inhibited by E2. Similarly, NCX1 mRNA expression was decreased only by E2.
Calbindin-D9k and PMCA1 were mainly localized in mucosa layer. The main site
of  the  NCX1
expression  was  muscularis  externa.  Calcium  related  gene
expressions  were  affected  by  steroid  hormones  in  esophagus  similar  with
previous studies. Study for regulation factor for Calcium related genes other than
steroid hormone is further needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP962
EP963
How does energy intake influence the levels of certain steroids?
Hana Jandikova, Michaela Duskova, Beata Racz, Hana Pospisilova,
Monika Sramkova, Martin Hill, Karel Vondra & Luboslav Starka
Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic.
Introduction
The influence of steroid hormones on food intake is well described. However,
there are only a few studies on the effect of food intake on steroid levels.
Methods
The study involved eight non-smoker women (average age 29.48G2.99 years;
average BMI 21.3G1.3 kg/m2); they did not use any kind of medication affecting
steroidogenesis. We analysed the influence of four various stimuli on the levels of
steroid hormones and melatonin. During their follicular phase of menstrual cycle,
each woman had an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), intravenous glucose
tolerance test (IVGTT), a standard breakfast and psyllium (a non-caloric fibre).
The samplings were performed fasting in the morning, at 20, 40, 60, 90, and
120 minutes.
Results
Cortisol declined during each test, which is a physiological decline in the morning
hours. In all tests (except of the application of the non-caloric fibre, psyllium),
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
however, this decline was modified. After the standard breakfast there was an
increase in cortisol at 40th minute. The OGTT and IVGTT tests led to a plateau in
cortisol levels. Testosterone levels showed no relationships to tested stimulations.
After the initial decline there was an increase in DHEA after all stimuli.
Conclusion
Despite the fact that we performed the tests in the morning hours, when steroid
hormone levels physiologically start to change due to their diurnal rhythm, we
still found that food intake influences some of the hormone levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP963
EP964
Endocrinological approach of individuals with gender dysphoria
(transsexuality): experience of a large center
Diana Martins1, Margarida Bastos1,6, Carla Baptista1, Lígia Fonseca2,6,
Grac¸a Santos2,6, Giselda Carvalho3,6, Francisco Rolo4,6, Susana Pinheiro5,6,
Daniela Guelho1, Nuno Vicente1, Luís Cardoso1, Diana Oliveira1,
Adriana Lages1, Mara Ventura1 & Francisco Carrilho1
1Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department of Coimbra
University Hospital Centre, Coimbra, Portugal;2Psychiatry Department of
Coimbra University Hospital Centre, Coimbra, Portugal;3Gynecology
Department of Coimbra University Hospital Centre, Coimbra, Portugal;
4Urology and Renal Transplantation Department of Coimbra University
Hospital Centre, Coimbra, Portugal;5Plastic Surgery Department of
Coimbra University Hospital Centre, Coimbra, Portugal;6Genitourinary and
Sexual Reconstruction Unit of Coimbra Hospital and University Centre,
Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction:
Gender  dysphoria
(GD)  is  featured  by  significant  difference  between  the
individual’s expressed gender and the gender others would assign him or her,
with marked distress in social and occupational functionality, according to
DSM-V classification. We report the experience in the clinical evaluation and the
results of hormonal therapy and sex reassignment surgery in a hospital center.
Methods:
It was conducted a retrospective analysis of 85 patients with GD, referred for
clinical and psychological evaluation, hormone therapy and sex reassignment
surgery (SRC) at the Genitourinary and Sexual Reconstruction Unit of Coimbra
Hospital and University Centre (Portugal).
Results:
Since 2004, a total of 85 patients, 47 female-to-male (FTM) and 38 male-
to-female (MTF) were evaluated. The number of patients seeking treatment has
increased substantially in the last 5 years. Age at initial endocrinology evaluation:
29.29G11.60 years, significantly lower (P!0.001) in the FTM group.
These patients had a high prevalence of mental health and psychiatric problems,
over 30% (NZ26) and other important associated pathology were evaluated
(multinodular goiter, neoplasia, diabetes, karyotype alterations and infectious
diseases).
Sixty-three  patients
(74.1%)  started  hormonal  treatment  without  significant
complications (prior self-medication in 12.9%). Thirty-seven patients (43.5%)
undergone sex-reassignment surgery, without significant differences between
MTF and FTM groups (PZ0.264) however waiting time for surgery was higher in
the last one. Surgical complications in 30% (NZ14) of operated patients (urethral
fistula in 4 patients who underwent phalloplasty).
Conclusions:
It was found that 55.3% of patients pretended sex reassignment therapy from
FTM.  Most  of  the  patients
(74.1%)  performed  hormonal  therapy  without
significant complications, so we can conclude that testosterone and estradiol
treatment in physiological levels are effective and safe in female and male
transsexual  patients.  Although
30%  of  operated  patients  had  post-surgical
complications, we consider that with increased clinical and surgical experience,
long-term outcomes for transsexual persons should improve.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP964
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP965
Correlation among DNA methylation status and LINE-1 expression in
rat brain
Somnath Mukherjee, K. C. Upadhyaya & D Sharma
JNU, New Delhi, India.
Abstract withdrawn.
Thyroid (non-cancer)
EP966
What does matter for AUS/FLUS: size, sex or age?
Ana Alves Rafael1, Sílvia Silva1, Ricardo Rodrigues Marques1,
João Sequeira Duarte2 & Luís Viana Fernandes1
1Department Cirurgia II, CHLO, EPE, Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisboa,
Portugal;2Department Endocrinologia, CHLO, EPE, Hospital Egas Moniz,
Lisboa, Portugal.
Background
The clinical attitude to the treatment of Bethesda System Category III lesions has
been under controversy. Our aim was to analyse three variables and to establish a
possible predictive value for carcinoma in patients with AUS/FLUS nodules.
Methods
Retrospective study of 671 thyroid fine-needle aspirations (FNAs) classified as
AUS/FLUS between January 2012 and June 2015. Size, sex and age were
analysed, using SPSS.
Results
671
(14.8%) FNAs were initially classified as Bethesda’s category III, in a
database of 4549 FNAs from 3696 patients. 195 patients underwent surgery. The
risk of malignancy for operated patients was 29.7%. Nodule mean size was
24.4mm. Nodules were bigger in men than in women (27mm/24mm). The median
size for histologically benign nodules was 26.5mm while malignant nodules had a
median of 25mm. Follicular carcinomas were larger than papillary carcinomas
(34mm/26.8mm). The histologic follow-up revealed a prevalence of malignancy
for women (30.7% vs 24.1%) and for younger ages. The median for histologically
benign nodules was in the 6th decade while for carcinomas was in the 5th.
Conclusion
Age was the only variable with predictable value for carcinoma in AUS/FLUS.
The probability of carcinoma reduces 3% per year according to a multifactorial
analysis. Patients over 70s have 5 times less probability of carcinoma than those
under 40s. According to that, the authors suggest that surveillance may be enough
for patients over 70s with AUS/FLUS nodules.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP966
EP967
Clinical features and outcomes of thyroid storm: a retrospective study
María Laura García1, Noelia G Rella1, Gabriela Szuman1,
María Florencia Scioscia1 & María Victoria Panebianco2
1Sanatorio Méndez, CABA, Argentina;2CEBBAD, Universidad
Maimonides, CABA, Argentina.
Thyroid storm (TS) is a rare but life-threatening manifestation of thyrotoxicosis.
Objective
To describe the clinical features and outcomes of patients admitted for TS
according to Burch-Wartofsky’s score (BW).
Methods
A retrospective review of subjects admitted to a single hospital from 2009 through
2015 was conducted.
Results
15
cases  were  identified.  Etiology:  autoimmune
(nZ8), factitious
(nZ3),
amiodarone-induced (nZ3), undetermined (nZ1). Manifestations at admission
were: cardiovascular (nZ8), fever (nZ3), delirium (nZ2), diabetic ketoacidosis
(nZ1) and hypokalemic paralysis (nZ1). Eleven had previous history of thyroid
disease (7 hyperthyroidism, 4 hypothyroidism). Hipokalemia (hk) was found in
8 cases and precipitating factors in 12. Thyroid hormone levels did not correlate
with the severity of thyrotoxicosis according to BW. One patient died from sepsis.
Late hospital discharge was found in 4 patients (PZ0.01): 3 required antithyroid
drugs withdrawal (febrile neutropenia, cholestasis, digestive intolerance) and the
other received a heart transplant.
Conclusions
We found 4 cases of TS per 10000 admitted. The most common etiology was
autoimmune.  Cardiovascular  manifestations  were  predominant.  Precipitating
factors  were  identified  in
80%  of  patients.  Unusual  findings were  high
consumption  of iodine, hk, factitious thyrotoxicosis  and  a prior  history  of
hypothyroidism. Mortality rate was 6.6%. Treatment with antithyroid drugs was
associated with a significant shorter time of hospitalization. This review adds data
to the few previous reports and provides useful information for the management
of TS, a rare and acute disease that requires high clinical suspicion in order to
improve patient survival.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP967
EP968
Mean platelet volume (MPV) and platelet distribution width (PDW) in
euthyroid woman with Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis
Muge Bilge1, Mine Adas2, Aylia Yesilova1 & Aysen Helvaci1
1Internal Medicine Clinic, Okmeydani Training and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey;2Endocrinology Department of Internal Medicine Clinic,
Okmeydani Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Objective
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) is extremely common, particularly among women.
Mean platelet volume (MPV) and platelet distribution width (PDW) are the
measure of platelet size. We aimed to investigate MPV and PDW levels in
euthyroid woman with HT.
Methods
This  was  a  retrospective  study  in  which  the  data  were  obtained  from  a
computerized patient registry database. We evaluated 145 women with HT and 60
matched healty controls, who applied to our outpatient clinic of the internal
medicine and endocrinology department. Anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) and
anti-tiroglobulin (anti-TG) antibody were positive in all patients. Serum thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH),free thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, platelet count
(PC),platelet mass (PM), MPV, and PDW were measured. PM was calculated by
multiplying MPV and PLT. All subjects iron, total iron binding capacity, ferritin,
vitamin B12 and folic acid were evaluated.
Results
There were no significant differences in age between the study and the control
groups. Anti-TPO and anti-TG levels were significantly higher in the study group
(P!0.001).Although serum TSH was within the reference value, which was
higher in the HT (P!0.009).Mean MPV,PDW and PM were significantly higher
in the HT (P!0.001).Analysis of subgroups indicated that TSH,MPV and PDW
levels were significantly higher in the levothroxine replacement patients in the HT
than  no  levothroxine  replacement  patients  in  the  HT.There  were  positive
corelation between PDW and anti-TPO levels (rZ0.217, PZ0.01). MPV was
positive correlated with anti-TPO and anti-TG levels (rZ0.175, PZ0.03; rZ
0.407, P!0.001,respectively), also PM was positive correlated with anti-TPO
and anti-TG levels (rZ0.168, PZ0.04; rZ0.250, PZ0.006, respectively).
Our results suggest that even if in euthyroid state, patients with HT have higher
MPV, PDW,PC, and PM levels than the healthy controls. Even if in euthyroid
state, HT patients with levothroxine replacement show higher MPV and PDW
levels than those with no levothroxine replacement. MPV and PDW parameters
are also positively correlated with serum TSH levels.
Conclusions
Because of have a higher risk of thyroid malignancies in HT patients,higher MPV
and PDW levels may be associated with inflammation and thyroid malignancies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP968
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP969
Association between serum insulin-like growth factor-1 and thyroid
nodules
Jaehyuk Lee1, Dong Yeob Shin2 & Kwang Joon Kim2
1Seonam University, Myongji Hospital, Goyang-si, Republic of Korea;
2Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Background
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is known to be closely related to the growth
of thyroid cells and thyroid diseases. However, the association between IGF-1,
thyroid nodule, and thyroid cancer has not been clearly established yet. Therefore,
this study investigated the association between IGF-1 and thyroid nodule size.
Methods
A total of 346 patients with thyroid nodules confirmed by ultrasonography were
included. For all participants, the levels of serum T3, free T4, TSH and IGF-1,
were determined by radioimmunoassay. Among the participants, the risk group
was defined as those with nodule size greater than 10mm or those with suspicious
features on ultrasonography even for nodule size smaller than 10mm, and they
underwent fine needle aspiration biopsy. The measurement data were expressed
as the mean G standard deviation (S.D.). The analysis of variance was performed
by t-test, and the correlation analysis was performed by linear regression.
Results
The proportion of patients with large nodule size and suspicious sonographic
features was significantly higher in risk group. In non-risk group, IGF-1 and
nodule size did not show a significant association. Subgroup analysis for the risk
groupfound  IGF-1
to  be  significantly  elevated  in  subjects  whose  cytology
returned as thyroid cancer. (173.3 ng/ml vs 213.1ng/ml, P-value !0.05). In this
group, IGF-1 and nodule size demonstrated a positive association (rZ0.195,
P-value !0.05), and multiple linear regressions found IGF-1 to be independently
associated with nodule size.(ßZ5.579, P-value !0.05)
Conclusions
A positive association between IGF-1 and nodule size was observed only in risk
group, and IGF-1 was elevated in thyroid cancer group. Measuring serum IGF-1
in patients with large thyroid nodule on ultrasonography and with suspicious
sonographic features may be clinically significant.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP969
EP970
The immune status peculiarities depending on the level of thyroid
peroxidase antibodies in Graves’ disease
Sergey Dogadin1,3, Margarita Dudina1,3, Andrey Savchenko2 &
Valentina Matsynina3
1Krasnoyarsk State Medical University named after Prof. V. F. Voino-
Yasenetsky, Krasnoyarsk, Krasnoyarsk region, Russia;2Institute for
Medical Problems of the North, Siberian Division, Russian Academy of
Medical Sciences, Krasnoyarsk, Krasnoyarsk region, Russia;3Krasnoyarsk
regional clinical hospital, Krasnoyarsk, Krasnoyarsk region, Russia.
It  is  known  that  thyroid  peroxidase  is  expressed  on  the  apical  surface  of
thyrocytes, where catalyze the iodination of thyroglobulin and may, also, be a
surface-cell antigen, which involves in the complement-dependent cytotoxicity
reactions. Objective: to study the immune status indicies depending on thyroid
peroxidase
(anti-TPO)  antibodies  in  patients  with  Graves’  disease
(GD).
Materials and methods. The study included 35 women aged from 18 to 55
years, mean age of 39.1G7.2, with manifestations of GD, before antithyroid
therapy. Concentrations of thyroid hormones were measured by RIA. Anti-TPO
concentrations was assessed by ELISA. The analysis of lymphocytes subset
pattern were performed by indirect immunofluorescence using the FITC-marked
monoclonal antibodies to CD3, CD4, CD8, CD16, CD19, HLA-DR. The Ig A, M,
G concentrations were determined by ELISA. The CD4C/CD8CT cell ratio and
the relative synthesis of IgA
(IgA /CD19C), IgM (Ig M/CD19C) and IgG
(IgG/CD19C) were also calculated. Results. The patients with more than 100
IU/L anti-TPO level were characterized by an increase in absolute lymphocytes,
relative  and  absolute  number  of  CD19C  and  HLA-DRCcells,  CD3C  and
CD8Ccells, compared to the control range and patients with anti-TPO less than
100 IU/L. In GD patients with at-TPO level more than 100 IU/l the leuko-T- and
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
leuko-B-cell ratios reduction, along with the IgA and IgM relative synthesis
decreasing were observed. The only difference of patients with anti-TPO less than
100 IU/l was the increasing of absolute lymphocytes number (P!0.05). But in
this  group  relationship  anti-TPO  with  relative  and  absolute  content  of
B-lymphocytes (rZC0.50, PZ0.026 and rZC0.47, PZ0.39, respectively),
and leuko-T-cell ratio (rZK0.58, PZ0.007) have been appeared. Conclusion.
The most significant changes of immunological indices in GD were found in
patients with more than 100 IU/L anti-TPO level. In the case of anti-TPO level
less than
100 IU/l the immunopathogenesis of GD is characterized by the
appearance of positive relationships anti-TPO with B-, and negative with T-cell
immunity indicies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP970
EP971
25-Hydroxy vitamin D levels and inflammatory markers in patients
with graves disease activation
Mustafa Ersoy & Aysen Akalın
Osmangazi University, Eski¸ehir Odunpazarı, Turkey.
Objective
By the definition of vitamin D receptors in many tissues, many functions of
vitamin D other than calcium homeostasis and bone metabolism were shown. A
role for vitamin D is suggested in the pathogenesis of Graves disease because of
the effects of vitamin D on the immune system. In our study the role of vitamin D
deficiency in the activation of Graves disease, development of autoimmune
thyroid disease and the relationship between vitamin D and inflammatory markers
were investigated.
Material and methods
Our study included 40 patients with active Graves disease, 20 patients with
euthyroid autoimmune thyroid disease, 20 healthy individuals and total 80 people.
Serum  25(OH)D  levels,  thyroid  autoantibodies  and  fibrinogen,  erithrocyte
sedimentation rate and hsCRP as inflammation markers were studied in all
subjects and waist and hip circumferences were measured and body mass indices
were calculated. We seeked relationship of vitamin D levels between Graves
disease activation and inflammatory markers in all groups.
Results
Vitamin D levels were found to be significantly lower in active Graves disease
and autoimmune thyroid disease patients from the control group. Vitamin D
showed a positive correlation with corrected calcium, serum phosphorus, urinary
calcium excretion and was negatively correlated with alkaline phosphatase,
parathyroid hormone, TRAb and anti TPO. Vitamin D levels of patients with
ophthalmopathy were significantly lower than the patients without ophthalmo-
pathy. In our study, we observed that vitamin D deficiency is also associated with
obesity and inflammation.
Conclusion
Vitamin D deficiency can play a role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid
disease and thyroid ophthalmopathy. Vitamin D deficiency can also predispose to
inflammation in patients with active Graves disease.
KeyWords:  Vitamin  D;  Graves  disease;  inflammatory  markers;  obesity;
ophthalmopathy
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP971
EP972
Inverse relationship between seasonal vitamin D variations and thyroid
antibodies (TAb) and TSH
Alessandra De Remigis1, Giammarco Tomei2, Franca Maria Lattanzio2,
Umberto Occhuzzi3, Maria Teresa Natalini4 & Daniele Rapino1
1Azienda Ospedaliera Valtellina Valchiavenna, Sondrio, Italy;2Ospedale
Civile Chieti, Chieti, Italy;3Ospedale Civile Avezzano, Avezzano, Italy;
4Ospedale Civile Teramo, Teramo, Italy.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Vitamin D has a role in the pathogenesis of thyroid autoimmunity.
There is evidence in humans that serum levels of 1,25(OH) D3 were found to be
significantly lower in patients with autoimmune thyroid diseases.
We have evaluated all samples performed in the endocrine labs tested for
vitamin D, AbTg, Ab-TPO and TSH from 2006 to 2015; 29216 samples for
vitamin D and 41014 for TSH, AbTg and TPO were considered.
We studied if the seasonal variations of vitamin D, that peaks in summer and has a
nadir in winter, could influence levels of TAb and TSH.
Vitamin D levels in summer were significantly higher than in other seasons.
Vitamin D from a mean level of 19 ng/ml in winter raises significantly in spring
reaching an average level of 26 ng/ml in summer and descending in autumn
reaching nadir in winter.
About TSH and thyroid antibodies, in particular AbTg shows an opposite trend
compared to Vitamin D. AbTg has a peak in winter around 7 ng/dl descending to
6 ng/dl in spring and remaining of similar value during the rest of the year.
Interestingly TSH has a small but direct correlation with the AbTg variation
ranging within normal  values but following a similar trend of that of the
antibodies (Pearson correlation rZ0.009, PZ0.03).
In conclusion our results seem to confirm an immunodepressive role of vitamin D
on thyroid autoimmunity; in summer when the maximum level of vitamin D was
reached, the concentration of TgAb was at minimum, while in winter at the lowest
level of vitamin D the TgAb titer reached their peak.
Respectively TSH follows the trend of AbT, when AbT level decreases in summer
at the maximum of vitamin D, thyroid function expressed by TSH ameliorates,
while in winter at the maximum of AbT TSH is higher, corresponding to the
lowest level of vitamin D.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP972
EP973
Autoimmune thyroiditis: association with two common polymorphisms
of the RAGE gene and oxidative stress
Maria Giannakou1, Katerina Saltiki1,2, Emily Mantzou2, Eleni Loukari2,
Georgios Philippou2, Konstantinos Terzidis2, Kiriaki Lilly2,
Charalampos Stavrianos2 & Maria Alevizaki1,2
1Endocrine Unit, Dept Med Therapeutics Alexandra Hospital, Athens
University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece;2Dept of Endocrinology,
Metabolism and Diabetes, Athens University School of Medicine, Athens,
Greece.
Introduction
Polymorphisms of the receptor for advanced glycation end products (AGEs),
RAGE, have been associated with autoimmune disorders and their complications.
There are no studies concerning Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT); the aim of our
study was to investigate the possible role of two RAGE polymorphisms (K
429TOC, K374TOA) in combination with indices of oxidative status in women
with HT.
Design
We examined 300 euthyroid women (44.8G13yrs); 205 had HT (positive thyroid
antibodies
(ThAb(C))  and  were  separated  in  two  groups;
96
under  T4
replacement, 109 without. 95 women without ThAb and negative family history
for HT were also studied (control). To evaluate oxidative stress, we measured
total lipid peroxide levels in serum (TOS). Thyroid function tests were also
performed. Genomic DNA was analyzed for the RAGE polymorphisms K429TO
C AluI and K374TOA MfeI.
Results
Women with HT on T4 had higher TOS levels compared to those without
treatment  and  to  controls
(mean  TOS:
520 mmol/l  vs
421.04 mmol/l  vs
447.6 mmol/l, respectively, PZ0.026). The prevalence of K429TOC RAGE
polymorphism was significantly higher in this group compared to HT without
treatment and controls (18.8% vs 11.9% vs 6.3% respectively, PZ0.032). In the
entire cohort, increased TOS and carrying the -429TOC polymorphism were
independent predictors of HT (OR1.64, OR1.60 respectively. The coexistence of
these factors had an additive effect (OR 5.4). The prevalence of K429TOC
polymorphism was higher in women with DM2 compared to those without
(33.3% vs 10.9%, PZ0.009). There was no difference in the prevalence of
K374TOA polymorphism r between the studied groups.
Conclusions
Women with increased TOS levels who are also carriers of the -429TOC
polymorphism of RAGE are at increased risk to have Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and
receive T4 replacement. These findings possibly suggest a role of this system in
the elevated oxidative stress accompanying autoimmune thyroiditis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP973
EP974
Surgery of benign thyroid disease - Analysis of vocal fold paralysis in
3019 patients
Bianca Kohnen1, Christina Schurmeyer2, Thomas H Schurmeyer2 &
Peter Kress1
1Departments of ENT, Klinikum Mutterhaus der Borromaerinnen, Trier,
Germany;2Departments of Internal Medicine II, Klinikum Mutterhaus der
Borromaerinnen, Trier, Germany.
Methods
To evaluate factors influencing the relative risk (RR) for vocal fold paralysis we
analyzed 3019 patients (69.5% female) having surgery for benign thyroid diseases
(58.7% nodular goiter, 17.5% inactive nodes, 16.3% thyroid autonomy, 6.5%
Grave’s disease). Operations were performed with intraoperative neuromonitor-
ing by general surgeons (GS, nZ1637) or physicians specially trained for ENT
(nZ1382). 19.2% of the procedures were carried out by residents in training.
Results
Vocal fold paralysis occurred in 198 subjects (6.6%), 6.3% in females and 7.0% in
males. Prevalence was not influenced by gender, age, recurrent disease (RR 1.20),
surgeries performed by physicians in training (6.2%, nZ581) or if minimal
invasive
(6.5%,  nZ769)  and  conventional  surgery
(6.6%,  nZ2250)  were
compared. Risk was increased in nodular goiter (7.3%, RR 1.37), but not in
Grave’s disease (6.6%, RR 1.01). A higher rate was seen in total (nZ1576, 6.9%)
and nearly total (nZ507, 8.1%) than in subtotal thyroidectomy (nZ866, 5.2%). A
lower rate (RR 0.54) was observed in operations performed by ENT (4.6%) than
by  GS  (8.2%).  Postoperative  haemorrhage
(4.6%  vs.
1.6%,  RR
2.94),
hypocalcemia ! 2.0 mmol/l (28.8% vs. 19.9%, RR 1.63) and the need for
calcium substitution (RR 1.65) or dihydrotachysterol treatment (RR 2.18) at
discharge from the hospital was documented more frequently in patients with
laryngeal nerve palsy.
Conclusion
In thyroid surgery a multinodular goiter, invasiveness of the operations and a
physician not trained for head and neck surgery are risk factors for vocal fold
paralysis. Postoperative haemorrhage and hypocalcemia are seen more frequently
in patients with damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP974
EP975
Evaluation of incidental 18f-Fdg uptake of thyroid with ultrasono-
graphy and elastosonography
Esra Tutal1, Melia Karakose1, Muyesser Sayki Arslan1, Mahmut Apaydin1,
Ayse Demirci2, Taner Demirci1, Erman Cakal1, Mustafa Sahin3,
Mustafa Ozbek1 & Tuncay Delibasi4
1Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit Teaching and Research Hospital, Ankara,
Turkey;2Abdurrahman Yurtarslan Oncology Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;
3Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;4Kastamonu
University school of Medicine, Kastamonu, Turkey.
Introduction
Thyroid incidentaloma detected by FDG-PET/CT (flourodeoxyglucose positron
emition tomography/computed tomography) is important because of high rate of
malignancy. Elastosonograpghy has proven valuable in discriminating malign
and  benign  thyroid  lesions.  In  this  study,  we  aimed  to  evaluate  PET
incidentalomas  by  ultrasonography  and  elastosonography  and  to  compare
cytopathological results with imaging findings.
Methods
A total of 50 patients included into the study and maximum standardized uptake
value
(SUV max) values were recorded. All patients underwent laboratory
evaluation (TSH, free T4, thyroglobulin antibody, thyroid peroxidase antibody
and calcitonin) and underwent ultrasonography, elatosonography and fine needle
aspiration cytology (FNAC). Cytopathological results were classified acoording
to the Bethesda system. Elasticity of the suspicious nodule was scored as
peviously described.
Results
Of the 50 patients, 16 patients (32%) were found diffuse uptake (group A) and 34
patients (68%) were found focal uptake (group B). In group A, at least 1 antibody
was found as positively (100%) and thyroid nodule was detected in 9 patients
(56%).  FNAC  was  revealed  malignant  cytology  consistent  with  papillary
carcinoma in 1 patient. In group B, thyroid nodule was detected in 31 patients.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
FNAC was revealed non-diagnostic in 4 patients, benign in 14 patients, atypia of
undetermined  significance  in
2
patients,  follicular  neoplasm  in
1
patient,
suspicious for malignancy in 7 patients and malignant in 3 patients. Surgical
resection was performed only in 4 patients and follicular carcinoma was revealed
in 1 patient and papillary carcinoma was revealed in 3 patients. There was no
statistically significant difference in the SUV max between benign and malignant
nodules in both group A and group B. There was a significant correlation between
presence of malignancy and elasticity score (rZ0.756, PZ0.000).
Conclusions
Increased  elasticity  score  correlate  with  high  likelihood  of  malignancy.
Performing an elastosonography with ultrasonography may provide additional
information to evaluate PET incidentalomas.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP975
EP976
Serum immunoglobulin G4 is closely related to develop Graves’
ophthalmopathy
Sung Hoon Yu1, Seong Jin Lee1, Ohk Hyun Ryu1, Sung Hoon Kim2,
Dong Sun Kim3, Jae Myung Yu1 & Hyung Joon Yoo1
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hallym University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea;2Division of Endocrinology &
Metabolism, Cheil General Hospital & Women’s Healthcare Center,
Dankook University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea;
3Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, HanYang University College
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Abstract withdrawn.
EP977
Immunohistochemical expression of iNOS and eNOS in thyroid goiter
Oliwia Segiet, Marek Michalski, Adam Piecuch, Marlena Brzozowa-
Zasada, Natalia Matysiak & Romuald Wojnicz
Medical University of Silesia, School of Medicine with the Division of
Dentistry, Chair and Department of Histology and Embryology, Zabrze,
Poland.
Introduction
Oxidative  stress  has  been  implicated  in  the  pathogenesis  of  many  thyroid
diseases, such as non-toxic nodular goiter and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Nitric
oxide synthases are responsible for the synthesis of nitric oxide from L-arginine.
There are three isoforms of nitric oxide synthase (NOS): neuronal NOS (nNOS),
endothelial NOS (eNOS) and inducible NOS (iNOS). They have important
functions in inflammation and vasoregulation but their role in thyroid diseases is
not well understood.
Methods
Thirty-one patients with thyroid goiter were included in the study: 18 cases with
non-toxic nodular goiter (NTNG) and 13 patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
(HT). Normal glands served as controls. Frozen sections were incubated with
purified mouse monoclonal antihuman antibodies against iNOS and eNOS. The
dilution of the primary antibodies was 1:100 and was verified in a series of pilot
experiments. The immunohistological investigations were performed by the
BrightVision method from ImmunoLogic. The number of positively stained cells
were counted and expressed as a mean value of at least 10 high power fields (HPF,
400x).
Results
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis demonstrated higher expression of both iNOS and eNOS
in comparison with non-toxic nodular goiter and healthy thyroid gland. Positive
staining for iNOS was observed in 96% of HT (4.6 cells/high power field - HPF),
whereas only 42% of NTNG (2.1 cells/HPF) and 30% (1.9 cells/HPF) of healthy
tissue showed immunoreactivity. eNOS was expressed in 89% of HT (4.1
cells/HPF), 40% of NTNG (2.0 cells/HPF) and 19% of healthy gland (1.9/HPF)
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusions
Oxidative  stress  markers  could  become  indicators  of  disease  activity  and
immunological phenotype. Alterations in the process of oxidative stress are
implicated  in  the  pathogenesis  of  autoimmune  thyroid  diseases,  such  as
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. However, the role of oxidative stress in inflammation
of thyroid is still not completely known and further studies in this matter should
be continued.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP977
EP978
Factors associated with persistent atrial fibrillation after achievement of
euthyroid state
Amel Melki1, Meriem Yazidi2, Ines Barka3, Fatma Chaker4,
Mélika Chihaoui5, Ons Rjeb6 & Hédia Slimane7
1Department of Endocrinology, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia;
2Department of Endocrinology, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia;
3Department of Endocrinology, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia;
4Department of Endocrinology, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia;
5Department of Endocrinology, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia;
6Department of Endocrinology, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia;
7Department of Endocrinology, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Atrial fibrillation (AF) occurs in up to 15% of patients with hyperthyroidism.
Although hyperthyroidism is usually regarded as a reversible cause of AF,
spontaneous  sinus  conversion  occurs  in  only
2/3
of  patients  upon  the
normalization of T4
levels. The aim of  this study was to identify factors
associated with persistent atrial fibrillation after restoration of euthyroid state.
Methods
We conducted a retrospective study of 13 years. Twenty patients hospitalized for
hyperthyroidism with AF and who had normalized their FT4 level during follow-
up were enrolled. Non parametric Mann Whitney test was used to compare
medians.
Results
The median follow-up period was 58 months. At the end of the follow-up period,
6 patients were euthyroid,
13 hypothyroid and 1 patient had a subclinical
hyperthyroidism. Eight of the 20 patients returned to sinus rhythm after a median
of 15 months. We found no significant difference between subjects who returned
to sinus rhythm and those with persistent AF in terms of age (55.3G18.6 vs
55.9G12.3 years, PZ1), gender (58.3% vs 41.7% men, PZ0.65), history of
hypertension (25% vs 25%, PZ1), history of diabetes (12.5% vs 16.7%, PZ1),
abnormal echocardiography (33.3% vs 10%, PZ0.51), the value of the ejection
fraction
(55.1G13.2%  vs
59.0G5.0,  PZ0.71),  toxic  nodular  etiology  of
hyperthyroidism (16.7% vs 83.3%, PZ0.33), the value of the initial FT4 level
(3.5G0.8 vs 5.1G5.1 ng/dl, PZ0.77) and the period between the diagnosis of
hyperthyroidism and the normalization of FT4 level (29.1G48.2 vs 31.9G27.6
months, PZ0.17).
Conclusion
Successful  treatment  of  hyperthyroidism  resulted  in  conversion  from  atrial
fibrillation in up to one third of our patients. No factors were associated with
persistent atrial fibrillation in our study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP978
EP979
Effect of smoking on thyroid function during pregnancy
David Ruiz Ochoa1, María Piedra León2, Bernardo Alio Lavín Gómez2,
Carmela Baamonde Calzada1, Fátima Mateos García1, María Teresa García
Unzueta2, I
˜igo Tejado Elviro1 & José Antonio Amado Sen˜arís2
1Sierrallana Hospital, Torrelavega, Spain;2Valdecilla University Hospital,
Santander, Spain.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Smoking affects thyroid function, the magnitude and direction of the effect varies
greatly with different studies. Less is known about the effect of smoking in thyroid
function during pregnancy.
Materials and methods
Healthy pregnant women with not known thyroid dysfunction were questioned
about smoking habit in the first trimester of pregnancy. Blood samples for TSH,
free T4 (fT4) and free T3 (fT3) were obtained in each trimester and for thyroid
antibodies (TPO- and Tg- antibodies) in the first trimester.
Results
A total of 445 pregnant women were included (357 non-smokers and 88 smokers).
Median age 32.00 (IQR 6), median BMI 23.4 (IQR 4.75). Education level:
1 woman without education (0.22%), 15 women incomplete primary education
(3.38%), 69 women complete primary education (15.54%), 210 women general
certificate of education or vocational education and training (47.30%), 61 women
bachelor’s degree (13.74%) and 88 women university degree (19.82%). Iodized
salt was consumed by 176 women (39.53%) and iodine supplement by 324
women (72.97%). There were no differences between smokers and non-smokers
in age, BMI, and consumption of iodized salt or iodine supplement. There was a
trend to higher consumption of tobacco among pregnant women with a lower
educational level (r K0.219; P!0.01). Smokers had a lower fT4 in the first
trimester (1.03 vs 1.08 ng/dl; P!0.01) and a higher fT3 in the first trimester (3.04
vs 2.95 pg/ml; P!0.01) and second trimester (2.97 vs 2.85 pg/ml; P!0.01) than
non-smokers. No significant differences were found in TSH levels. Thyroid
antibodies were positive in the first trimester in 8.4% of non-smokers and 4.5% of
smokers (PZ0.269).
Conclusion
Smoking during pregnancy is associated with a lower fT4 in the first trimester and
a higher fT3 in the first and second trimester of gestation. The effect size is slight
and its clinical implications are unknown.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP979
EP980
Evaluation of ambulatory arterial stiffness index in hyperthyroidism
Ozlem Turhan Iyidir1, Mehmet Muhittin Yalcin1, Alev Eroglu Altinova1,
Emre Arslan1, Bahar Uncu Ulu2, Ceyla Konca Degertekin1 & Fusun Balos
Toruner1
1Gazi University, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara,
Turkey;2Gazi University, Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey.
Hyperthyroidism whether endogenous or exogenous in origin causes hemo-
dynamic  changes  which  associated  with  adverse  cardiovascular  outcomes.
Ambulatory arterial Stiffness index (AASI) is a non invasive way of measuring
arterial stiffness. Short term BP variability is derived from 24-hour ambulatory
blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) recordings. BP variability and AASI are
associtaed with increased cardiovascular risk.
We aimed to investigate AASI and short term BP variability in both overt and
subclinical hyperthyroidism and their relationship with thyroid hormones.
We enrolled 59 patients with hyperthyroidism and 25 healthy euthyroid controls
in the study. The hyperthyroid group included 36 patients with subclinical
hyperthyroidism and 23 patients with overt hyperthyroidism. There were no
statistically  significant  differences among  overt  hyperthyroidism, subclinical
hyperthyroidism and control groups in terms of AASI (0.43G0.15, 0.38G0.12,
0.42G0.13, respectively; PZ0.315). Variability of diastolic BP, as expressed by
24-hour  diastolic  CV,  was  significantly  higher  in  patients  with  overt
hyperthyroidism than patients with subclinical hyperthyroidism (14.8G2.6 vs
12.8G2.5%, PZ0.023). There were significant positive correlations between
AASI and fT3 (rZ0.246, PZ0.02) and fT4 (rZ0.219, PZ0.04) while TSH was
not correlated with AASI (rZ0.023, PZ0.838). After adjusting for confounders,
age, 24-hour systolic and diastolic BP, variability of systolic and diastolic BP
(24-hour systolic and diastolic CV) and fT4 were independent predictors of AASI
(r2Z0.460, P!0.001). Our study showed that AASI did not differ between overt
and subclinical hyperthyroidism whereas short term BP variability was higher in
overt  hyperthyroidism  than  subclinical  hyperthyroidism.  Also,  there  was  a
positive relationship between AASI and free thyroid hormones.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP980
EP981
Herbal medicines used for thyroid disease in Turkey, and short-term
effects of Anethum graveolens
Mustafa Altay1, Ihsan Ates2, Fatma Kaplan Efe3 & Ibrahim Karadag3
1Keçioren Training and Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Numune Education and Reseach
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;3Kec¸ioren Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Aim
To investigate the herbal medicines (HM) used for thyroid disease, their effects
and use rates in Turkey.
Materials and methods
A total of 547 patients (494 females and 53 males) had a thyroid disease were
included in the study. The patients were questioned whether they used any
alternative therapies or HM for their thyroid disease. The patients who used HM
were asked about the kind of the HM, and duration of use. The data regarding the
dose of the medicine used, levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), free
triiodothyronine (sT3), free thyroxine (sT4), anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO),
antithyroglobuline (anti-TG), and thyroid receptor antibody (TRAb), and the
number and the volume of the nodules before and after use of HM were noted
from the files of the patients.
Results
A total of 55 (10.1%) patients used at least one HM. Anethum graveolens (AG)
was used by 9.1% (n:50) of the patients. There was a decrease in median sT3 level
(4 pg/ml vs 3 pg/ml; PZ0.004), and an increase in nodule volume (0.3 ml vs
0.8 ml; PZ0.005) in patients that used dill alone. The analysis on the amount of
dill consumed revealed that the median nodule volume increased in all groups in
relation with the amount of dill used (P!0.05). There was a significant increase
in median TSH levels, and significant decrease in median sT4 and sT3 levels in
the patients that used one bunch of dill (100 g).
Conclusions
We determined that use of AG affected thyroid hormone levels and thyroid
nodules. Use of 100 g AG was found to decrease thyroid hormone levels.
Therefore, we suggest that AG should not be recommended to patients diagnosed
with hypothyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP981
EP982
The impact of the TIRAD system on medical tactics in patients with
thyroid nodules
Aleksandr Ametov1, Yuri Aleksandrov2 & Elena Yanovskaya2
1Russian Medical Academy for Advance Medical Studies, Moscow, Russia;
2Yaroslavl State University, Yaroslavl, Russia.
Widespread use of ultrasound has led an increase of patients with thyroid nodules.
But individual scores of ultrasound images leads to different estimates of the
results and the misunderstandings between specialists. A decision of problem is
possible through standardization based on TIRADS.
Purpose
Evaluated the impact the application of TIRADS and TBSRTC on medical
assistance to patients with thyroid nodules. The examination dates of 4415 people
was estimated retrospectively. In group A (3370 people) the FNAB was done in
all nodules more 10 mm. In group B (1045 people) selection of patients for FNAB
was performed into account TIRADS. The results of FNAB was evaluated for
TBSRTC.
Results
Conclusions in group A were received: TBSRTC1 in 32.9%, TBSRTC2 - 57.2%,
TBSRTC3.4 - 4.2%, TBSRTC5 - 2.6%, TBSRTC6 - 3.1%. Conclusions in group
B were different: TBSRTC1 - 3.4%, TBSRTC2 - 85.8%, TBSRTC3.4 - 4.5%,
TBSRTC5 - 2.7%, TBSRTC6 - 3.6%. Results were connected with indications
for  FNAB  and  motivation  of  specialists who  performed  investigation.  The
number of not sufficiently informative results in group A was 32.9%, in group B -
3.4%. Widespread use of FNAB (account recommendations) has led to increase
of benign conclusions
(TBSRTC2): 57.2% (group A) & 85.8% (group B).
Detection of thyroid cancer in both groups was similar: 3.1% (A) & 3.6% (B).
In group B in categories TIRADS4-5 frequency of detection of tumors was
62.1%,  including  cancer
- 54.1%.  In  categories  TIRADS1-3  frequency  of
detection tumor was 8.1%, including cancer - 1.8%.
Conclusion
Most  patients  with  TIRADS2
does  not  require  FNAB.  The  patients  with
TIRADS2 needs for FNAB necessarily despite previous conclusions excluding
cancer. The patients with TIRADS4-5 have high risk of thyroid cancer therefore
they need of the periodical control (FNAB). TIRADS makes more specific
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
evidence for FNAB, limits the number of people who needs of FNAB and sends
cytologist at the probability of detecting thyroid tumors. TIRADS governs
assistance to patients with thyroid nodules.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP982
EP983
Percutaneous laser ablation of benign thyroid nodules
Yuri Aleksandrov, Ivan Belyakov & Yuri Patrunov
Yaroslavl State University, Yaroslavl, Russia.
Objectives
To  define  sonographic  and  color  Doppler  peculiarities  of  thyroid  nodules
influencing the efficacy and follow-up principles of percutaneous laser ablation
(PLA).
Methods
Three hundred forty-five thyroid nodules were treated with 1-3 PLA sessions and
subsequently sonographically examined every three months within one year.
Indication for PLA was increase  sizes of nodules. All  nodes were benign
according to FNAB.
Results
The best results after PLA were achieved in solitary solid nodules 20 mm or
smaller with low vascularity of peripheral or combined pattern. Effectiveness
depended on the size of the nodules. Big nodules and hypervascular nodules
needed more PLA sessions with increased laser power supply. The nodules with
calcification, avascular regions of extremely high or low US-density and big fluid
collections  showed  poor  volume  regression.  Nodules  having  high  density
according to US elastography worse decreased. Homogenous surrounding tissue
US-pattern allows faster nodule volume decrease comparatively to autoimmune
thyroiditis. In 72% nodules reduced their volume more than to two times and 24%
disappeared. Avascular and hypoechoic nodules in four week period after PLA
show further volume regression; persisting vascularization suggests a second PLA
session.
Conclusions
US- guided PLA is effective in benign thyroid nodules and may be alternative to
conservative methods. Grey-scale and color Doppler sonography is the leading
follow-up  modality for  patients after PLA. The  best period of control for
effectiveness of treatment was ninth month after PLA
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP983
EP984
Incidence and prevalence of overt hypothyroidism and causative
diseases in Korea as determined using claims data provided by the
health insurance review and assessment service
Sun Wook Kim1, Jae Hoon Chung1, Hye Jeong Kim3, Seo Young Sohn2,
Young Nam Kim1, You-Bin Lee1, Hye-In Kim1 & Seung-Eun Lee1
1Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea;2Myongji Hospital, Seonam University College
of Medicine, Goyang, Republic of Korea;3Soonchunhyang University
Hospital, Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.
Background
The incidence and prevalence of overt hypothyroidism have been reported to be
2 to 4/1,000 population/year and 8 to 13/1,000 population, respectively, in foreign
countries. As there has been no nationwide survey to obtain data in Korea, the
present study investigated the incidence and prevalence of overt hypothyroidism
in Korea using claims data provided by the Health Insurance Review and
Assessment Service. The proportions of causative diseases for hypothyroidism
were also analyzed.
Methods
This study was retrospectively performed with 541,969 Korean patients (92,832
men and 449,137 women), with overt hypothyroidism, treated with thyroid
hormone between 2008 and 2012.
Results
The incidence of overt hypothyroidism in Korea was 2.26/1,000 population/year
(0.78 in men and 3.72 in women), and the prevalence was 14.28/1,000 population
(4.40 in men and 24.03 in women). When patients with thyroid cancer were
excluded, the incidence was 1.56/1,000 population/year (0.54 in men and 2.57 in
women). The incidence increased with age, with peaks in and after the late 60s in
men and in the early 50s in women. The prevalence peaked in the early 70s in men
and in the late 50s in women.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
This is a report of the first nationwide investigation of the incidence and
prevalence of overt hypothyroidism in Korea, although it is limited to patients
treated with thyroid hormone.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP984
EP985
Clinical, imaging and cytological differences between palpable and
non-palpable thyroid nodules
Joa˜o Silva1, Sandra Paiva2, Cristina Ribeiro2, Miguel Melo2,
Leonor Gomes2, Margarida Bastos2 & Francisco Carrilho2
1Portuguese Armed Forces University Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal;
2Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction
The prevalence of palpable nodules varies between 3-7% and nodules diagnosed by
ultrasonography between 20-76%. According to the American Thyroid Associ-
ation’s guidelines it isn’t recommended to perform routine thyroid ultrasound for
thyroid nodules diagnosis, unless they are palpable or there are any risk factors.
Objective
Evaluation of sonographic and cytological differences between palpable and non-
palpable thyroid nodules.
Methods
Evaluation of patients referred to perform of Fine Needle aspiration Cytology
(FNAC) in an Endocrinology department. Clinical evaluation was performed by the
same doctor without access to clinical or ultrasound information, characterizing if
they had palpable nodules and where they were located. Ultrasound and FNAC
were made after clinician evaluation.
Results
We analyzed 186 nodules of 139 patients (85.6% female) with a mean age of
57.3G14,8y. 80 nodules were palpable (43%). 19 patients (19 nodules) did not
perform cytology for failing criteria.
The palpable nodules compared to non-palpable were larger (G23.36 vs. 16.94G
7.46 cm 8.21 cm; PZ0.032) and located superiorly (PZ0.03). There was no
statistically significant difference between age, gender, location second ante-
roposterior  axis  and  sonographic  characteristics  of  the  nodule.  Cytological
evaluation of this series we obtained 6.5% of non-diagnostic (11/167), 81.4%
benign, 8.9% FLUS, 1.2% follicular tumor, 1.2% suspected malignancy and 0.6%
malignant. There was no statistical difference comparing palpable nodules with
non-palpable nodules.
Conclusions
The palpable nodules were only 43% of nodules observed by ultrasound, were
larger and were located more superiorly. There was no statistically significant
difference between cytological results. The assessment of palpable and non-
palpable nodules should be similar.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP985
EP986
Selenium concentration in Korean patients with thyroid disease:
a preliminary report
Sun Wook Kim1, Jae Hoon Chung1, Hye Jeong Kim2, Seo Young Sohn3,
Young Nam Kim1, You-Bin Lee1, Hye-In Kim1 & Seung-Eun Lee1
1Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea;2Soonchunhyang University Hospital, Soon-
chunhyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea;
3Myongji Hospital, Seonam University College of Medicine, Goyang,
Republic of Korea.
Background
Selenium is an important trace element for thyroid hormone metabolism and its
deficiency can cause hypothyroidism. Serum or plasma selenium concentration
has been known as best biomarker which reflects selenium intake and reserve. We
preliminarily assessed the serum or urine selenium concentrations in patients with
thyroid disease compared to healthy normal population. We also investigated the
correlation of serum selenium concentration with urine selenium concentration,
thyroid hormone levels as well as urinary iodine concentration (UIC).
Methods
A total of 97 patients (32 men, 65 women, 52.4G14.7 years) with benign thyroid
nodule or thyroid dysfunction who visited the Thyroid Center at Samsung
Medical Center between 2008 and 2013 were included. Data of 175 healthy
subjects provided by Lee et al. were used as control. Serum T3, free T4, and TSH
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
concentrations  were  measured  using  commercialized  RIA  or  IRMA  kits.
Serum/urine selenium and UIC were measured by inductively coupled plasma-
mass spectrometry (ICP-MS).
Results
Median serum selenium concentration was 110 mg/l (95% CI, 73-156) with a
range from 67 to 169 mg/l. Median urine selenium concentration was 66.3 mg/gCr
(95% CI, 28.7-283.5) with a range from 14.4 to 489.0 mg/gCr. When compared to
175 healthy subjects [serum 84 mg/l (95% CI, 30-144), urine 34.5 mg/gCr (95%
CI, 0.8-107.2)], serum & urine selenium concentrations of the patients with
thyroid disease were significantly higher than those of healthy subjects (P!
0.001, respectively). Serum selenium concentration was significantly correlated
with urine selenium concentration after log transformation (rZ0.88, PZ0.022)
but not with UIC, T3, free T4 and TSH concentrations.
Conclusions
Selenium concentrations of the patients with thyroid disease were significantly
higher  than  those  of  healthy  subjects.  Serum  selenium  concentration  was
significantly correlated with urine selenium concentration.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP986
EP987
Evaluation of TSH receptor antibodies and histopathological features in
patients with toxic multinodular and toxic nodular goiter
Cevdet Aydin1, Husniye Baser2, Fatma Neslihan Cuhaci1, Didem Ozdemir1,
Samet Yalcin3, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara,
Turkey;3Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
General Surgery, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Association between high thyrotrophin receptor antibodies (TRAb) and relapse of
thyroid cancer in Graves’ patients was reported previously. In this study, we
aimed to investigate possible relation between TRAb and thyroid malignancies in
patients with toxic multinodular (TMNG) and toxic nodular goiter (TNG).
Methods
Thyroidectomized patients with a preoperative diagnosis of TMNG, TNG and
euthyroid  multinodular  or  nodular  goiter
(MNG/NG)  were  retrospectively
recruited for the study. Preoperative TRAb measurements were available in
221 patients with TMNG/TNG and 43 patients with euthyroid MNG/NG. Results
were compared in these two groups.
Results
Histopathology was malignant in 71 (32.1%) and benign in 150 (67.9%) of
TMNG/TNG patients. In euthyroid group, malignancy was observed  in 18
(41.9%) and benign histopathology was observed in 25 (58.1%) patients. In
TMNG/TNG group, TRAb was positive in 7 (9.9%) patients with malignant and
17
(11.3%) patients with benign histopathology (PZ0.742). In euthyroid group,
TRAb was positive in 1 (5.6%) patient with malignant and 2 (8.0%) patients with
benign histopathology (PZ0.756). TRAb positivity did not change between
TMNG/TNG and euthyroid patients with malignant and benign histopathology
(PZ0.569 and PZ0.620, respectively).
Conclusion
TRAb positivity seems to have no effect on malignant histopathology in patients with
TMNG and TNG. Limited number of cases and lack of TRAb measurement in all
TMNG/TNG patients undergoing thyroidectomy might contribute to this finding.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP987
EP988
Malignancy is associated with microcalcification and AP/T ratio in
ultrasonography, but not with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis in histopathol-
ogy in patients with thyroid nodules evaluated as Bethesda Category III
(AUS/FLUS) in cytology
Oya Topaloglu1, Husniye Baser2, Neslihan Cuhaci1, Nuran Sungu3,
Abdussamed Yalcin4, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara,
Turkey;3Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine,
Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey;4Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University School of Medicine, Department of General Surgery, Ankara,
Turkey.
Introduction
The  predictors  of  malignancy  are  important  for  decision  of  appropriate
management  in  nodules  with  atypia  of  undetermined  significance/follicular
lesion of undetermined significance (AUS/FLUS). Our aim was to determine the
ultrasonographical, clinical and biochemical predictors of malignancy in these
patients.
Methods
A total of 427 patients with Bethesda Category III (AUS/FLUS) thyroid nodules
were included in this retrospective study. We divided the nodules into two
subgroups  according  to  the  histopathology  as  benign  and  malignant,  and
compared the preoperative ultrasonographical, clinical and biochemical findings.
Results
In overall, 427 patients with 449 AUS/FLUS nodules that went on surgery, the
rate of malignancy was 23.4% (105/449). When evaluated seperately, the rate of
malignancy was 25.8% in nodules with AUS (82/318) and 17.6% in nodules with
FLUS  (23/131)  (PZ0.061).  The  vast  majority  of  malignant  specimens  in
histopathology consisted of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) (nZ91, 86.7%).
Preoperative ultrasonographic features of 105 malignant nodules in histopathol-
ogy were compared with the 344 benign nodules. AP/T ratio was significantly
higher in malignant group compared to benign group (PZ0.013). In multiple
logistic  analyses,  we  found  that  AP/T  ratio,  and  microcalcification  were
independently correlated with malignancy (P!0.05). Although, in univariate
analysis, presence  of  thyroid  autoantibodies and Hashimoto’s  thyroiditis  in
histopathology were higher in malignant group significantly, we did not find any
correlation between malignancy and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis in histopathology in
multivariate analysis (PO0.05).
Conclusion
In Bethesda Category III nodules with higher AP/T ratio and microcalcification,
surgery might be considered as the first theurapeutic option instead of repeat
FNAB or observation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP988
EP989
Increased Serum Levels of IL-28 and IL-29 and Protective Effect of
IL28B rs8099917 Polymorphism in Patients with Hashimoto’s
Thyroiditis
Dilek Arpaci1, Sevim Karakas Celik2, Murat Can3, Gunes Cakmak Gunes4,
Fatih Kuzu1, Mustafa Unal1 & Taner Bayraktaroglu1
1Bulent Ecevit University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endo-
crinology and Metabolism, Zonguldak, Turkey;2Bulent Ecevit University,
Faculty of Sciences and Arts, Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Zonguldak, Turkey;3Bulent Ecevit University, Faculty of
Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Zonguldak, Turkey;4Bulent Ecevit
University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Genetics, Zonguldak,
Turkey.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is thought to result from the decreased of T helper type 2
(Th2) responses, leading to progressive destruction of thyrocytes. IFN-l1, -l2,
and -l3 (also known as IL-29, IL-28A, and IL-28B, respectively) is a recently
described  member  of  the  IFN-l  family  and  has  been  shown  to  decrease
production of Th2 cytokines in vitro. However, the role and mechanism of IFN-l1
in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis remain unknown. The purpose of our study is to
elucidate whether the IL-29 and IL-28B gene polymorphisms are susceptibility
genes for the development of HT. Also we aimed to investigate the effects of
IL-29 and IL-28 serum levels on pathogenesis of HT. Using the polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method, the
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of IL28B rs8099917 (IL28 G/T) and
IL29 rs30461 (IL29 T/C) were studied in 99 patients with HT and 100 healthy
controls. Considering the allelic distribution for IL28 G/T polymorphism a higher
frequency of G allele was observed in the control group when compared to the HT
group. So it was suggested that G allele may be a protective role for HT
pathogenesis (ORZ0.388 95%-CI 0.217-0.693; PZ0.001). Also our findings
demonstrate that there was statistically significant difference in serum IL-28 and
IL-29 levels between case and control groups (P!0.001). The increased serum
levels of IL-28 and IL-29 in patients with HT was determined. In conclusion,
IL-28B gene polymorphism and serum IL-28 and IL-29 levels seemed to play a
role in the pathogenesis of HT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP989
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP990
The value of blood cell markers in patients with thyroid nodules
including atypia of undetermined significance/follicular lesion of
undetermined significance cytology
Dilek Arpaci1, Guldeniz Karadeniz Cakmak2, Ali Ugur Emre2,
Mustafa Unal2, Fatih Kuzu1, Burak Bahadir3, Muammer Bilici4 &
Taner Bayraktaroglu1
1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Bulent Ecevit University, Zonguldak,
Turkey;2Department of General Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Bulent
Ecevit University, Zonguldak, Turkey;3Department of Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, Bulent Ecevit University, Zonguldak, Turkey;4Department of
Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Bulent Ecevit University,
Zonguldak, Turkey.
Background
Atypia of undetermined significance/follicular lesion of undetermined signi-
ficance (AUS/FLUS) is a heterogeneous that cannot be definitively diagnosed as
benign, malignancy-suspect, or malignant. The estimated risk of AUS/FLUS
malignancy is reported 5% to 15% according to the Bethesda System (BS). This
study was conducted to evaluate the ability of mean platelet volume (MPV) and
neutrophil-to-lymphocyte  ratio
(NLR)  to  predict  the  malignant  potential  of
nodules diagnosed as AUS/FLUS.
Materials and Methods
We retrospectively analyzed 101 patients for whom thyroid fine needle aspiration
biopsy
(FNAB)  analysis  indicated  AUS/FLUS  and  who  underwent  surgery
between 2011 and 2015. Demographic, laboratory, and histopathological data
were obtained from a database. The patients were categorized into two groups:
malignant or benign and comparisons between groups were performed.
Results
The mean age was 49.01G11.59 (20-80) years, the mean TSH level was 2.04G
2.09 mIU/ml. (0.01-11.87), the mean FT4 level was 0.98G0.43 pg/ml (0.54-
3.96), and the mean FT3 level was 3.71G0.80 pg /ml, (2.15-7.46). Of the 101
patients, 26 (25.7%) had solitary nodules and 75 (74.3%) had multinodulary
goiter. The malignancy rate (cytological atypia) was 33.7%, and there were no
differences between the two groups in terms of age, gender, or TSH or FT4 levels.
Median preoperative red cell distribution width (RDW) level was 13.4 inthe
benign group, while it was 14.4 in patients with malignancy, demonstrating a
significant  correlation
(PZ0.034) Both MPV and NLR were elevated in
malignant nodules.
Conclusions
The malignancy risk of AUS/FLUS evident upon thyroid FNAB was higher than
anticipated by the BS. MPV, NLR and RDW are useful for estimating the
malignancy risks of these diseases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP990
EP991
Neck lesions located outside the thyroid bed with similar echogenity of
thyroid tissue
Fatma Dilek Dellal1, Cevdet Aydin2, Didem Ozdemir2, Reyhan Ersoy2,
Berrak G. Ocal3 & Bekir Cakir2
1Ankara Ataturk Training and Research Hospital, Department of Endo-
crinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;3Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Faculty
of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
We aimed to determine demographical, hormonal, ultrasonography(US) and
cytological features of cases with neck lesions that are located outside the thyroid
region and have similar echogenity with thyroid tissue.
Method
Neck US reports of patients who underwent fine needle aspiration(FNAB) under
US guidance in our clinic in a period of one year were reviewed retrospectively.
Lesions having similar echogenity with thyroid tissue and defined as ectopic or
outside  the  thyroid  bed  were  enrolled.  Demographical,  hormonal,  US  and
cytological features were obtained from medical records.
Results
There were 76 patients(69 female, 7 male) with a mean age of 51.07G12.81.
64(84.2%) of patients had a history of thyroid surgery and 12(15.8%) were not
operated before. 85.5%of lesions were located at the level of hyoid bone, 9.2%
inferior to thyroid lower pole and 5.3% in other sites. Localization of lesions did
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
not differ between patients with and without previous thyroidectomy (PZ0.083).
Median lesion volume was 0.57 ml (0.06-24.13). Ultrasonographically, 93.4% of
lesions were isoechoic and 6.6% were hypoechoic. 89.5% of lesions were solid
and 10.5% had mixed texture. Marginal irregularity was observed in 13.2% of
lesions. US features were similar in patients with and without thyroidectomy. 62
(81.6%) lesions were positive with Tc99m pertechnetate scintigraphy and avidity
rate  was  significantly  higher  in  operated  patients
(PZ0.001). Cytological
diagnosis was benign in 73.7%, atypia of undetermined significance/follicular
lesion of undetermined significance in 2.6%, nondiagnostic in 22.4% and acute
supurative infection in 1.3%. There were no differences in cytopathological
results between patients with and without thyroidectomy (PZ0.649).
Conclusion
In patients with a history of thyroid surgery, US examination should be extended
to outside the thyroid bed to detect possible ectopic tissue. We showed that such
lesions  might  also  occur  in  patients  without  surgery  and  US  features  and
cytopathological findings were similar in thyroidectomized and nonthyroidecto-
mized patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP991
EP992
Increased chemiluminescence activity of blood neutrophilic granulo-
cytes from patients with Graves’ disease
Margarita Dudina1,3, Sergey Dogadin1,3, Andrey Savchenko2 &
Ivan Gvozdev2
1Krasnoyarsk state medical University named after professor V.F. Voyno-
Yasenetsky, Krasnoyarsk, Russia;2Scientific research Institute of medical
problems of the North, Siberian division Russian Academy of medical
Sciences, Krasnoyarsk, Russia;3Krasnoyarsk regional clinical hospital,
Krasnoyarsk, Russia.
The cellular structures lipid peroxidation related to immune system dysfunction
seems to have a key role in autoimmune theory of Graves’ disease (GD). Aim: to
investigate chemiluminescent (CL) activity of blood neutrophilic granulocytes in
patients with GD. Materials and methods: Twenty six women, mean age 40.7G
13.2, with manifestation of GD up to antithyroid therapy and 30 sex- and age-
matched healthy subjects were examined. Serum thyroid hormone concentrations
were measured by RIA. The median of TSH, fT4 anti-TPO concentration in GD
patient were 0.17 (0.01; 0.72) mU/l, 17.9 (13.1; 30.3) pmol/l and 374.0 (223.0;
817.4) IU/ml respectively. The neutrophilic granulocytes were isolated from
heparinized whole blood by double density gradient centrifugation in the ficoll-
urografin: rZ1.077 g/cm3 for lymphocytes separation, rZ1.119 g/cm3 for the
neutrophils isolation. The spontaneous and zymosan-induced (ZiCL) was studied
for
90
minutes  on
36-channel  chemiluminescent  analyzer
“CL3606”.  The
following  characteristics  have  been  identified:  time  to  maximum
(Tmax),
maximum  intensity  value  (Imax),  reflecting  the  maximum  reactive  oxygen
species (ROS) level synthesis and the area under the curve (S), describing total
synthesis of ROS during 90 min. of the study. Results: Whole blood CL was
significantly greater in GD patients than in controls. Increased Imax of luminol-
dependent spontaneous- and Zi-CL (P!0.05) of neutrophils was observed. The
lucigenin-dependent CL study revealed that patients with GD have reduced the
Tmax of ZiCL. In healthy controls the concentration of TSH negatively correlated
with  Tmax  of  lucigenin-dependent  spontaneous(rZK0.89,  PZ0.019)  and
induced (rZK0.94; PZ0.005) CL, the fT4 level is also negatively correlated
with S (rZK0.83, PZ0.042) of lucigenin-dependent spontaneous CL, Tmax
(rZK0.83, PZ0.042) and S (rZK0.94; PZ0.005) of lucigenin-dependent
induced CL of neutrophils. In GD patients interaction in pairs of anti-TPO/Tmax
(rZK0.70, PZ0.036) and anti-TPO/Imax(rZK0.72, PZ0.030) of luminol-
dependent induced CL was observed. Conclusion. Hyperactivity and reactivity of
peripheral  blood  neutrophils  in  GD  certify  by  respiratory  explosion  in
spontaneous  and  induced  of  secondary  ROS  level  synthesis.  Enhanced
excitability  to  phagocytosis-related  stimuli  can  mediate  the  autoimmune
mechanism in GD.
2. The relationship between indicators of respiratory burst of neutrophils and
thyroid hormone when BG is lost, but there is a moderate negative correlation
between CL response and the level of at-TPO.
Keywords:  graves  disease,  neutrophilic  granulocyte,  chemiluminescence,
reactive oxygen species
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP992
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP993
Effectiveness of radiofrequency ablation of the autonomously
functioning benign thyroid nodules
Viacheslav Solovov, Michael Vozdvizhenskiy, Andrew Orlov &
Alexander Makhonin
Samara Regional Oncology Center, Samara, Russia.
Introduction
The usual treatment for autonomously functioning benign thyroid nodules was
surgery until the advent of new techniques such as radiofrequency ablation (RFA).
This study aimed at estimating RFA efficacy of autonomously functioning benign
thyroid nodules.
Material and Methods
The analysis included the results of treatment of 108 patients with autonomously
functioning benign tumors of the thyroid gland, received in the Samara Oncology
Center. All patients had high level of thyroid hormones and low level of
thyreotropin. In all of them scintigraphy determined hot nodules. All the patients
underwent  fine  needle  biopsy  twice.  RF  ablation  was  performed  using  an
18-gauge, internally cooled electrode, length 10 cm, working part 0.7 cm. During
the follow-up nodule volume and thyroid function were evaluated.
Results
The mean follow-up was 15.3G3.6 months. RFA was an effective method for
treating hot nodules. The mean nodule max diameter was initially 6.5G4.1 cm
and significantly decreased after treatment at 1 month (3.1G1.9 cm, P!0.05) and
at 6 months (0.5G2.9 cm, P!0.05). Levels of triiodothyronine, free thyroxine,
and thyrotropin reach normal in 2-3 weeks after RFA.
No serious complications such as thyroiditis, voice change, and hematomas were
observed.
Conclusion
RFA was effective and safe for treating autonomously functioning benign thyroid
nodules and it might be recommended for treating hot benign thyroid nodules as
the first-line treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP993
EP994
Sorafenib-induced changes in thyroid hormone levels in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma
Carolien Beukhof, Sander Bins, Leni van Doorn, Wouter de Herder,
Theo Visser, Ron Mathijssen & Robin Peeters
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Background
Recent studies suggest enhanced peripheral thyroid hormone metabolism as an
explanation for the changes in thyroid hormone levels in patient treated with
Sorafenib.
Methods
In this single centre, prospective, observational cohort study 60 patients with
hepatocellular  carcinoma  were  treated  with  Sorafenib.  Thyroid  stimulating
hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine (FT4) were measured at baseline (time-0), at
6 weeks (time-1) and at the end of therapy (time-end).
In
36 patients extensive thyroid hormone  profile  including  thyroxine
(T4),
triiodothyronine (T3) and reverse triiodothyronine (rT3) was determined.
Results
Four patients (7%) developed clinically significant thyroid disorder compatible
with thyroiditis. Interestingly, nineteen patients
(33%) showed mild thyroid
disturbances with increasing FT4 or TSH. The mean FT4 increased significantly
from time-0 to time-1 from 18.7 to 21.0 pmol/l, P!0.001. TSH levels increased
from 1.78 to 2.54 mU/l, P!0.001.
T3  concentrations  decreased  significantly,  whereas  rT3
and  T4
increased
significantly. The serum T3/rT3 ratio significantly decreased from 3.91 to 3.85
(P!0.001) and the rT3/T4x100 ratio significantly increased from 0.41 to 0.48
(P!0.001).
From time-1 to time-end FT4 increased further from 21.0 to 22.4 pmol/l (P!
0.01). TSH, T3/rT3 ratio and rT3/T4x100 ratio did not show significant changes
from time-1 to time-end.
Conclusions
Thyroiditis occurred in 7% of the patients. The increase in FT4 in combination
with an increased TSH suggests an altered setpoint of the hypothalamus pituitary
thyroid-axis. The marked decrease in the T3/rT3 ratio and increase in the rT3/T4
ratio in patients during the treatment with Sorafenib, suggests increased type D3
deiodination and diminished D1 activity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP994
EP995
Alterations of thyroid functions in obesity: is there any impact of
co-existence of type 2 diabetes mellitus?
Omercan Topaloglu1, Fatih Sumer2, Sedat Cetin1, Saim Yologlu3,
Cuneyt Kayaalp2 & Ibrahim Sahin1
1Inonu University, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Malatya, Turkey;
2Inonu University, General Surgery, Malatya, Turkey;3Inonu University,
Biostatistics, Malatya, Turkey.
Objective
The number of studies that investigate thyroid functions in obese patients is
limited, and little known about the effect of co-existence of type 2 diabetes
mellitus on thyroid functions. In our study, we aimed to evaluate the spectrum of
thyroid function in the both diabetic and non-diabetic obese patients.
Materials-Methods
145 obese patients who were admitted to our department of endocrinology and
metabolism, between June 2014 and December 2015, have been included in the
study. The patients have been grouped according to their BMI values and
co-existence of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clinical and laboratory data of the
patients were analyzed retrospectively and cross-sectionally. Statistical analyses
were performed by using frequency analysis, T-test, Chi-square test and Pearson
correlation tests.
Results
Primary hypothyroidism, subclinical hypothyroidism and subclinical hyperthyr-
oidism were determined in 1.4, 0.7 and 2.8% of the patients respectively. Isolated
elevation of free T3 and free T4 levels were determined in 26.6% and 1.4% of the
patients respectively. No statistically significant difference was found between
diabetic and non-diabetic groups for these parameters.
There were statistically significant positive correlations between BMI and free T4
levels, and also free T3 levels (PZ0.001, PZ0.002, respectively). There was no
significant  correlation  between  BMI  and  TSH
(PZ0.717).  There  was  no
significant correlation between age and BMI values (PZ0.237).
There  were  no  statistically  significant  difference  for  BMI,  TSH
(thyroid
stimulating hormone) and anti-TPO (anti-thyroid peroxidase) values between
diabetic (nZ69) and non-diabetic obese patients (nZ76) (PZ0.623, PZ0.937,
PZ0.114 respectively).
Conclusion
Our results suggest that obesity may be associated with elevated free T4 and free
T3 levels. Co-existence of type 2 diabetes mellitus seems to have no effect on
thyroid functions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP995
EP996
Transforming growth factor b1 in postpartum thyroiditis
Anna Zielinska, Rafal Maciulewski, Katarzyna Siewko, Anna Poplawska-
Kita, Gabryela Kozlowska, Danuta Lipinska, Maria Gorska &
Malgorzata Szelachowska
Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine,
Medical University of Białystok, Bialystok, Poland.
Introduction and aims
TGF-b1 participates in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases e.g. diabetes,
Hashimoto disease, autoimmune digestive system disorders. The aim of our study
was to evaluate TGF-b1 levels during pregnancy and after childbirth in women
who developed postpartum thyroiditis (PPT) in comparison to the healthy control
group (CG) and women with positive anti-thyroid antibodies (ATAC) who did
not develop PPT.
Material and method
96 women were examined in 1st and 3rd trimester of pregnancy (T1, T3) and 3.6
months  postpartum  (3MPP,  6MPP): 47 ATAC without  Hashimoto  disease
(28 with PPT, 19 ATAC without PPT) and 49 controls. We measured TGF-b1
(ELISA), TSH, FT3, FT4, ATG, ATPO with the clinical chemistry analyzer
Architect Chemistry System, TRAbs (RIA), fasting glucose, OGTT (enzymatic
method with hexokinaze) and HbA1c (HPLC). All women underwent thyroid
USG.
Results
28 ATAC developed PPT. Median levels of TGF-b1 were highest in ATAC who
did not develop PPT but no significant differences were found between the levels
in pregnancy and postpartum period. The lowest levels of TGF-b1 were observed
in CG and also did not differ significantly between trimesters and postpartum
period. Only in PPT group TGF-b1 levels increased significantly at 3MPP in
comparison to T1 (T1Z15.2G6.6 ng/ml vs 3MPPZ18.4G9.3 ng/ml; P!0.01
after Bonferroni correction). Significantly higher TGF-b1 levels were observed at
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
3MPP between PPT and CG (PZ0.02), in T1 and T3 between ATAC without
PPT and CG (PZ0.049; PZ0.017, respectively). We found significantly higher
TGF-b1 levels between all ATAC and CG in T3, 3MPP and 6MPP (PZ0.012;
PZ0.015; PZ0.034, respectively).
Conclusions
Our results may suggest that TGF-b1 plays an important role in the pathogenesis
of PPT. Significantly higher TGF-b1 levels between ATAC women and CG
suggest  that this  cytokine  may  play  a crucial  role  in  autoimmune  thyroid
disorders. This is the second study on the role of TGF-b1 in PPT and it confirms
that TGF-b1 increases in postpartum period in women with PPT.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP996
EP997
Markers of apoptosis in thyroid goiter
Oliwia Segiet, Łukasz Mielan´ czyk, Marek Michalski, Natalia Matysiak,
Olesya Klymenko, Krzysztof Helewski & Romuald Wojnicz
Medical University of Silesia, School of Medicine with the Division of
Dentistry, Chair and Department of Histology and Embryology, Zabrze,
Poland.
Introduction
Thyroid goiter may be present in different thyroid pathologies, such as non-toxic
nodular goiter (NTNG) or Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT), as a result of focal
hyperplasia of thyrocytes (nodal goiter) or generalized enlargement of thyroid
(diffuse goiter). Previous studies have demonstrated that programmed cell death,
known as apoptosis, plays an important role in the pathogenesis of many thyroid
diseases, especially inflammatory conditions.
Materials and methods
Pathological tissues of 49 patients with thyroid goiter: 38 cases with non-toxic
nodular goiter and 11 patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis were examined during
the study. In a standard immunohistochemical procedure, monoclonal antibodies
anti-CD95/Fas and anti-CD253/TRAIL were applied. The number of positively
stained cells were counted and expressed as a mean value of at least 10 high
power fields (HPF, 400x).
Results
Hashimoto’s  thyroiditis  demonstrated  higher  expression  of  CD95/Fas  and
CD253/TRAIL in comparison with non-toxic nodular goiter and healthy thyroid
gland.  Positive  staining  for  CD95/Fas  was  observed  in
100%  of  HT  (2.9
cells/HPF),  whereas  only
53%  of  NTNG  showed  immunoreactivity
(1.6
cells/HPF). 91% of HT revealed expression of CD253/TRAIL (4.2 cells/HPF).
Only 32% of NTNG demonstrated the presence of CD253/TRAIL (1.9 cells/HPF).
Conclusions
Apoptotic markers could become indicators of disease activity and immunological
phenotype.  Alterations  in  the  process  of  apoptosis  are  implicated  in  the
pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid diseases, such as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP997
EP998
Hemithyroidectomy seems to be a reasonable initial surgical approach
for patients with cytologically Bethesda Category III (AUS/FLUS)
thyroid nodules
Cuneyt Bilginer1, Didem Ozdemir2, Oya Topaloglu2, Cevdet Aydin2,
Gurkan Dumlu3, Hayriye Dogan4, Reyhan Ersoy2 & Bekir Cakir2
1Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University
School of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Ankara, Turkey;3Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine,
Department of General Surgery, Ankara, Turkey;4Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Atypia of undetermined significance/follicular lesion of undetermined signi-
ficance (AUS/FLUS) termed as Bethesda Category III constitute 15-30% of
thyroid cytology. However, the risk of malignancy in this heterogenous category
is estimated as 5-15%. The recent studies has been reported the malignancy rate
in the wide range of 6-48%. This causes surgical approach variability between
different centers. We aimed to evaluate the initial malignancy rate, indication of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
complementary thyroidectomy, and malignancy rate in contralateral thyroid lobe
in patients with AUS/FLUS thyroid nodules who underwent hemithyroidectomy.
Methods
We reviewed the medical records of 47 (7 male, 40 female; mean aged 40.3G
13.3)  patients  with  cytologically
48
AUS/FLUS  nodules  who  underwent
hemithyroidectomy operation at our institution. The patients with tumor size
!10 mm (microcarcinoma), papillary carcinoma with follicular, oncocytic, clear
cell variants were accepted as low risk group. Patients with tumor size R10 mm,
papillary carcinoma with columnar, tall cell, insular, solid, diffuse sclerosing
variants, follicular carcinoma with widely invasive variant were accepted as high
risk group.
Results
The preoperative cytology was evaluated as AUS in 32 (66.7%) nodules and
FLUS in 16 (33.3%) nodules. Histopathology was reported as benign in 34
(72.3%) patients and as malignant in 13 (27.7%) patients. However, 9 (19.2%)
patients was in high risk group, 4 (8.5%) patients was in low risk group. Of 13
patients, complementary thyroidectomy was performed in 11 (23.4%) patients. Of
11 patients who underwent contralateral lobectomy, 9 (81.8%) patients had
benign histopathology and 2 (18.2%) patients had malignant histopathology.
Discussion
Malignancy  rate  in  patients  with  AUS/FLUS  nodules  who  underwent
hemithyroidectomy  was  found  as
27.7%.  Moreover,  malignancy  rate  in
contralateral lobe was demonstrated as 18.2%. It seems that lobectomy is a
reasonable initial surgical approach for these patients. Further studies with larger
sample size are needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP998
EP999
Risk Factors for the development of hypothyroidism after thyroid
lobectomy
Ines Barka, Fatma Chaker, Hajer Bouzouita, Melika Chihaoui,
Osman Kilani, Mariem Yazidi, Ons Rejeb & Hedia Slimane
Endocrinolgy Department, La Rabta Hospital University, Tunis, Tunisia.
Bakground
Thyroid-lobectomy is a frequent procedure performed in patients with a variety of
thyroid conditions.The aim of this study is to determine the prevalence of post-
operative hypothyroidism and the risk factors of hypothyroidism in patients
undergoing thyroid-lobectomy.
Patients and methods
We retrospectively reviewed patients who underwent a thyroid lobectomy for
benign disease from january 2000 to 2014. Patients with known hypothyroidism
before surgery or on thyroid hormone supressive therapy were excluded. We
compared the age, the sex, the TSH level and the presence of thyroid antibodies
between the patients who developped hypothyroidism after surgey and those
without hypothyroidism.
Results
69 patients underwent a thyroid-lobectomy for benign disease.
The mean age of patients at the moment of the thyroidectomy was 41.67G13.05
years, and the majority (95.7%) was female.
We identify a hypothyroidism in 28 patients (40.6%) with a mean duration of
35.1G49.8 months (1-168 months) after lobectomy. Subclinical hypothyroidism
was present in 42,8%.
Patient with hypothyroidism had a higher pre-operative TSH level compared to
euthyroid patients (2.28G1.08 vs. 1.15G0.60 mUI/ml, PZ0.001). Preoperative
TSH  levels  O2.5 mUI/ml  showed  significant  correlation  with  postoperative
hypothyroidism (P!0.0001). Nodules number was less in hypothyroidism group
patient: 1.7 versus 2.5 (P!.0027). There was no significant relationship between
age, sex and thyroid auto-antibodies and the subsequent risk of hypothyroidism.
Conclusions
The prevalence of post-hemithyroidectomy hypothyroidism was 40.6%.
A preoperative  high-normal  serum  thyrotropin level  as a  risk  factor  of
hypothyroidism was noted. Routine monitoring of serum thyrotropin level should
be performed in all patients who undergo a hemithyroidectomy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP999
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1000
Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD) and mental illness: An evaluation
of parietal cell antibodies, intrinsic factor antibodies, vitamin B12 and
psychiatric symptoms in patients with AITD and Non-AITD controls
Doerte Leineweber1, Britta Galling2 & Thomas H. Schurmeyer1
1Abt. Innere Medizin II, Klinikum Mutterhaus der Borromaerinnen, Trier,
Germany;2The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Psychiatry Research, Glen Oaks,
New York, USA.
Introduction
Associations of autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) with autoimmune gastri-tis
and mental disorders have been suggested, but evidence for a connection is
lacking.
Methods
We compared the co-incidence of parietal cell antibodies (PCAO20 RE/ml),
intrinsic factor antibodies (IFAO1.19 AU/ml), vitamin B12 plasma levels (!200
pg/ml) and mental illness in patients with AITD (nZ398), e.g. active (TPOC),
atrophic (TPOK) and solely thyroglobulin positive (TGC) Hashimoto’s and
Grave’s disease (TRABC), and Non-AITD controls (nZ144; no thyroid disorder
or non-autoimmune hypothyroidism). Results show the overall prevalence of
mental illness as well as anxiety disorders (A), depression (D) and somatization
disorder (S) separately.
Results
A higher rate of PCA but not IFA was prevalent in AITS vs Non-AITD (22.1% vs
9.7%). Low vitamin B12 levels were found more frequently in TPOK (8.3%) and
TGC(8.7%) Hashimoto’s and Grave’s disease (10.8%, P!0.05). Rates of mental
illness were alike in all groups. No association of mental illness with PCA, IFA or
vitamin B12 was found.
Conclusion
PCA, but not IFA are frequently observed in AITD, and no association of AITD
and mental illness was evident in the preliminary results of the present study.
Mental illness (%)
n
Anti-body   PCA[ %   IFA[ %   B12Y %
all
A
D
S
AITD
398
22.1
3.8
4.8
31.4
5.6
11.1
13.8
Active
278
TPOC
21.6
2.5
2.9
31.7
6.8
11.9
14.4
Hashimoto
Atrophic
60
TPOK
33.3
10.0
8.3
30.0
6.7
15.0
10.0
Hashimoto
TGC
23
TGC
8.7
8.7
8.7
43.5
17.4
0.0
30.4
Hashimoto
Grave’s
37
TRABC
16.2
0.0
10.8
24.3
8.1
5.4
5.4
disease
Non AITD
144
9.7
2.8
3.5
32.6
7.0
14.6
11.1
Hypothyr-
96
0
7.3
1.0
3.1
32.3
5.2
17.7
9.4
eoidism
No thyroid
48
0
14.6
6.3
4.2
33.3
10.4
8.3
14.6
disease
nZ patients; Bold numbers indicate a significant difference (P! 0.05).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1000
EP1001
Assessment of 25-Hydroxy vitamin D level in pre- and postmenopausal
women with euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Muge Bilge1, Mine Adas2, Aylia Yesilova1 & Aysen Helvaci1
1Internal Medicine Clinic, Okmeydani Training and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey;2Endocrinology Department of Internal Medicine Clinic,
Okmeydani Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Objective
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is a common autoimmune disorder. A few studies have
analyzed the association between serum vitamin D levels and Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis and available data remains inconclusive. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the association between serum 25-Hydroxy vitamin D levels in pre- and
postmenopausal woman with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
Methods
We evaluated 120 premenopausal women with euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
(Group 1), 51 postmenopausal women with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (Group 2),
and  the  control  groups  consisted  of
102
(74
premenauposal  and
28
postmenauposal) age matched healthy subjects; who applied to our outpatient
clinic  of the internal medicine and endocrinology department.  Anti-thyroid
peroxidase (TPOAb) and anti- thyroglobuline (TGAb) antibody were positive in
all patients. Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free thyroxine (FT4), free
triiodothyronine (FT3), 25-Hydroxy vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH)
levels were measured.
Results
In the group 1 the mean vitamin D level was 12.46 mg/L (SDG12.34), compared
to 19.467 mg/L (S.D.G8.19) in the control group for premenopausal women,
PZ0.02 (Table 1). In the group 2 the mean vitamin D level was 18.46 (S.D.G
10.97) mg/L, compared to 23.12 mg/L (S.D.G8.60) in the control group for
postmenopausal women (Table 2).
Table 1 Comparison of premenopausal women with euthyroid Hashimo-
to’s thyroiditis and control group
Group 1 (nZ120)   Control (nZ74)
P
Age
36.41G7.8
36.59G7.86
NS
TSH (mIU/ml)
2.86G1.45
1.90G0.92
!0.001
Free T4 (ng/dl)
1.15G0.34
1.13G0.13
NS
Free T3 (ng/dl)
2.96G0.51
2.96G0.42
NS
TPOAb (IU/ml)
288.32G290.78
8.82G5.56
!0.001
TGAb (IU/ml)
285.84G604.72
16.01G11.29
!0.001
Vitamin D (mg/l)
12.46G12.34
19.47G8.19
0.02
PTH (ng/l)
46.80G17.30
49.15G18.03
NS
(NS; Not Significant).
Table 2 Comparison of postmenopausal women with euthyroid Hashimo-
to’s thyroiditis and control group
Group 2 (nZ51)    Control (nZ28)
P
Age
54.2G5.65
53.28G5.31
NS
TSH (mIU/ml)
2.74G2.05
2.47G1.11
NS
Free T4 (ng/dl)
1.14G0.25
1.13G0.15
NS
Free T3 (ng/dl)
2.99G0.46
3.01G0.39
NS
TPOAb (IU/ml)
329.81G326.51
7.89G2.83
!0.001
TGAb (IU/ml)
381.32G721.65
20.50G17.11
!0.01
Vitamin D (mg/l)
18.46G10.97
23.12G8.60
NS
PTH (ng/l)
52.16G23.25
51.18G18.34
NS
(NS; Not Significant).
Keywords:  Hashimoto’s  thyroiditis,
25-Hydroxy  vitamin  D,  pre-  and  post-
menopausal woman
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1001
EP1002
Occurrence of ATD-induced agranulocytosis and its treatment
Jitka Cepkova1, Martina Lasticova2 & Jan Cap1
14th Department of Internal Medicine University Hospital, Hradec Kralove,
Czech Republic;23th Department of Internal Medicine University Hospital,
Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.
Introduction
Agranulocytosis represents a  serious  complication  of  thyreostatic
(ATD)
treatment. The aim of our work was to determine how often did agranulocytosis
occur in Graves’ disease patients admitted to the thyroid treatment department of
our clinic for RAI treatment between the years 1999 and 2014.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Patients and methods
We have retrospectively analysed 699 patients (572 women and 127 men at the
average age of 51.5G12.9 years). 327 (47%) of them took carbimazole (CBZ),
293
(42%) took methimazole (MMI) and 79 (11%) took propylthiouracyl.
Results
Agranulocytosis was the reason for RAI treatment in 10 out of 699 patients. There
were 9 women and 1 man affected; at the average age of 51G21.9 years.
In 7 cases, the agranulocytosis occurred after MMI. In 3 cases it was after CBZ.
After CBZ was recalculated to the corresponding dose of MMI, the average dose
of ATD was 22.7G12.9 mg MMI/day. The time span between the initiation of the
ATD therapy and the development of agranulocytosis was 20-85 days. 8 patients
experienced the symptoms, while in 2 cases the agranulocytosis was diagnosed by
chance from a routine blood count check. The average duration of agranulocytosis
was 7.6G3.2 days. 5 patient were administered G-CSF (9.6G3.4 days) and
5 patients were not (5.6G1.5 days).
Conclusion
The occurrence of agranulocytosis in our population of patients was 1.43%, while
the literary data indicate a prevalence of
0.2-0.5%. In all the patients the
agranulocytosis developed early in first three months. One fifth of the patients was
without any symptoms. Application of G-CSF did not reduce the duration of
agranulocytosis
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1002
EP1003
Does Immunosuppressive Therapy improve outcomes in Graves’
disease: Results from a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis
Tristan Struja, Larissa Gubelin, Alexander Kutz, Hannah Fehlberg,
Beat Muller & Philipp Schutz
Kantonsspital Aarau, Medical University Clinic, Department of
Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism, Aarau, Aargau, Switzerland.
Objective
Whether  additional  immunosuppressive  drugs  to  standard  treatment  with
thyreostatic drugs reduce the risk for relapse in Graves’ disease is not well
understood. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to study the
effects of immunosuppressive drugs on relapse rate and treatment effect of
patients with hyperthyroidism due to Graves’ disease.
Methods
We searched PubMed, EMBASE and Cochrane in July 2015 for randomized-
controlled trials [RCT] comparing immunosuppressive drugs including corticos-
teroids, rituximab and azathioprine in patients with Graves’ disease. We did not
restrict the electronic searches for trials by date or language. The primary
endpoint was relapse of disease until follow-up, secondary endpoints were
reduction of thyroid volume and TSH-receptor-antibodies [TRAb].
Results
We included 7 RCTs with a total of 862 participants. Trials were mostly small
with moderate to high risk for bias. There were 113 relapses in 481 patients
receiving immunosuppressants compared to 225 relapses in 381 patients (RR
for recurrence of 0.39, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.21, 0.71). There was also a
significant risk reduction found for patients in RCT (0.28 RR, 95% CI 0.18, 0.46),
whereas the pooled data for controlled trials showed only a trend (0.54 RR,
95%  CI  0.26,  1.13).  There  was  a  significant  reduction  of  thyroid  volume
(K10.61ml, 95% CI K15.48, K5.75) and TRAb levels (K17.01 U/L, 95% CI
K33.31, K0.72).
Conclusions
We found a significant reduction in relapse when immunosuppressive drugs were
added to standard treatment, although the number of the trials was small with high
heterogeneity in regard to type of drugs used.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1003
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1004
Vitamin D levels in Graves’ disease with and without exophthalmos: a
case-control study
Nermin Sheriba, Manal Mohamed Abushady, Mona Mohamed Abdelsalam,
Tamer Fahmy Eliwa & Mohamed Samir Almasri
Ain Shams University, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt.
There is evidence that vitamin D has a variety of effects on immune system
function, which may enhance innate immunity and inhibit the development of
autoimmunity. It suppresses T-cell proliferation, and inhibits secretion of pro-
inflammatory Th1- and Th2-related Cytokines. In Graves’ ophthalmopathy (GO),
a diffuse infiltration of lymphocytes is seen in the orbital adipose tissues and
extracellular muscles. Th1 and 2 appear to play a role GO.
Aim
To assess the relation between vitamin D deficiency and Graves’ disease with or
without exophthalmos.
Method
85 Egyptian individuals with Graves’ disease attending Ain Shams University
Hospital Endocrinology clinic participated in this study, they were 3 groups:
Group 1: 30 subjects with Graves’ disease with exophthalmos. Group 2: 30
subjects  with  Graves’  disease  without  exophthalmos.  Group
3:
25  healthy
individuals. Patients with chronic kidney or liver disease, diabetes or those taking
vitamin D or any drugs affecting its level were excluded. Thorough history taking
and full clinical examination was done. Measurement of vitamin D level and FT3,
FT4, TSH.
Results
There was a highly significant difference between group 1 and 2 as regard their
disease duration and carbimazole dose and duration (PZ0.001) and TSH, FT3
and FT4 levels (P!0.05). Those in group 1 had longer duration of the disease,
higher dose of carbimazole, higher FT3 and FT4 and lower TSH. There was
significant difference between the 3 groups as regard vitamin D (P!0.01). All
subjects in group 1 were vitamin D deficient (100%). In group 2 (66.7%) were
deficient, 23.3% were insufficient and 10% were normal. In the control 56% were
deficient,
40% were insufficient and 4% were normal. There is a significant
difference within groups (1, 2) and (1, 3) (P!0.01) as regard vitamin D. There
was  a  significant  inverse  correlation  between  vitamin  D  &  the  degree  of
exophthalmos (P!0.01) in group 1. There was a significant positive correlation
between vitamin D and TSH (P!0.05) in group 2. TSH levels were independent
predictor of vitamin D Levels in the studied subjects (P!0.01).
Conclusion
Vitamin D was deficient in subjects with Graves’ disease with exophthalmos than
those without exophthalmos and control. The degree of exophthalmos is inversely
correlated with the degree of vitamin D deficiency.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.EP1004
EP1005
Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis
Ricardo Fonseca, Joa˜o Sequeira Duarte, Francisco Santos, Carlos Bello,
Catarina Roque, Ricardo Capitão, Rute Ferreira, Filipa Serra &
Carlos Vasconcelos
Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisbon, Portugal.
Background
Amiodarone  is  an  antiarrhytmic  drug  used  mainly  in  atrial  fibrillation.
Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT) is less common than hypothyroidism,
but it represents a true therapeutic challenge. AIT can be due iodine load (type 1)
or a destructive thyroiditis (type 2).
Methods
Retrospective study of patients with AIT, diagnosed between 2010 and 2015, in a
central hospital. We reviewed medical records regarding age, gender, amiodarone
therapy, hospitalizations, cardiovascular events, thyroid function and therapy.
We used descriptive statistics, t-test for continuous variables and chi-squared
distribution for categorical variables.
Results
We identified 40 patients with AIT (nZ40): 15% were type 1, 62.5% type 2 and
22.5% mixed or undefined forms. Mean age of presentation was 71.1G9.7 years,
with an equal distribution of gender. 47.5% were managed as inpatients, mainly
due worsening of atrial fibrillation or cardiac insufficiency, with higher FT4 levels
(PZ0.014). All patients stopped Amiodarone after the diagnose, however 25%
stopped this drug before the appearance of AIT, with a maximum of 11 months
between them. Most patients had TSH suppressed, with a mean FT4 level of
46 pmol/l and FT3 of 10.6 pmol/l. Thyroid anticorps were more prevalent in
type 1 TIA (P!0.001). Methimazole was used in 85% of the patients, 52.5% did
Prednisolone and 15% of cases were transient without treatment. Treatment
duration mean was 11.5 months (2 - 48), statistically significantly higher in type 1
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
vs type 2 (P!0.001). A total of 10 cardiovascular events after the beginning of
AIT treatment, with another hospitalization needed. 3 patients died, 2 of them due
to the thyroid disfunction.
Conclusion
AIT is a concern in elderly people, because treatment is challenging. Patients
treated with Amiodarona and AIT need frequent hospitalizations. Type 2 AIT was
the most frequent (62.5%), with higher FT4 (PZ0.014), but treatment duration
was smaller (P!0.001).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1005
EP1006
Relationship of insulin sensitivity with HOMA-IR and QUICKI index in
euthyroid woman with Hashimoto’s
Muge Bilge1, Mine Adas2, Aylia Yesilova1 & Aysen Helvaci1
1Internal Medicine Clinic, Okmeydani Training and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey;2Endocrinology Department of Internal Medicine Clinic,
Okmeydani Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Objective
It is recognized that autoimmun thyroid dysfunction is associated with weight and
metabolic changes, insulin resistance and type 1 diabetes. In this study, we aimed
to investigate whether thyroid autoimmunity had an effect on insulin sensitivity in
euthyroid woman with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
Methods
Forty-seven newly diagnosed euthyroid woman with Hashimoto’ thyroiditis with
a mean age of 43 years were included in the study. The control group consisted of
39 age and BMI matched healthy subjects. Thyroid hormones and antibodies,
thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) and thyroglobuline antibody (TGAb),
insulin, glucose, c-peptid, HbA1c and uric acid levels, and Homeostasis Model
Assessment İnsulin Resistance (HOMA-IR) and Quantitative Insulin Sensitivity
Check Index (QUICKI) parameters were measured in all the subjects.
Results
No significant correlation was observed between thyroid autoimmunity and
HOMA-IR and between thyroid autoimmunity and QUICKI in both groups
(Table 1).
Table 1
Patient
Control
P
Age
43.62G8.64
41.68G7.43
NS
TSH (mIU/ml)
2.1G1.61
2.0G1.01
!0.001
Free T4 (ng/dl)
1.15G0.32
1.13G0.13
NS
Free T3 (ng/dl)
2.97G0.49
3.0G0.39
NS
TPOAb (IU/ml)
288.43G291.17
8.81G5.20
!0.001
TGAb (IU/ml)
323.17G651.96
16.98G12.36
!0.001
Uric acid (mg/dl)
4.09G1.09
3.94G0.93
NS
Fasting glucose (mg/dl)
86.95G10.83
88.64G9.61
NS
Fasting insulin (mg/dl)
11.28G6.68
11.31G13.30
NS
C peptid (ng/ml)
2.38G1.05
2.44G1.36
NS
HbA1c (%)
5.5G0.37
5.42G0.50
NS
BMI
28.37G6.06
28.80G9.28
NS
HOMA-IR
2.41G1.66
2.44G2.90
NS
QUICKI index
0.34G0.03
0.35G0.03
NS
NS: Not significant.
Conclusion
Thyroid autoimmunity seem to not have a potential effect on insulin sensitivity in
patients with newly diagnosed euthyroid Hashimoto’s.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1006
EP1007
Thyroid dyshormonogenesis: therapeutic data of a group of seventeen
patients
Nesrine Cheikhrouhou, Mouna Mnif, Fatma Mnif, Dhouha Ben Salah &
Mohamed Abid
Department of Endocrinology, CHU Hedi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia.
Introduction
Thyroid dyshormonogenesis (TD) accounts for 15-20% of congenital hypothyr-
oidism (CH). Levothyroxine is the treatment of choice with the immediate goal to
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
raise the serum T4 as rapidly as possible. Surgical treatment is indicated in case of
compressive or suspected goiter.
Patients and methods
Seventeen patients with thyroid dyshormonogenesis belonging to 4 Tunisian
families were included in a descriptive prospective study. They were followed up
for a period of 12 years.
Results
We recruited 11 males and 6 females. The average age of our patients at diagnosis
was 6.97 years (range: 1 month-30 years). Diagnosis of thyroid dyshormonogen-
esis was after developing clinical signs of hypothyroidism for 11 patients (64%),
on occasion of family screening for 4 patients (32%) and after exploration of
goiter for 2 patients (14%). 6 patients had goiter at diagnosis.
Treatment  with  levothyroxine  has  been  decided  for  all  our  patients  after
confirmation of hypothyroidism. The average dose of L-thyroxine, evaluated in
13 patients, was 134.37 ug/day with extremes of 50 and 200 ug. Adherence was
evaluated good for 6 patients (35%) and poor for 9 patients (52%). 2 patients were
not evaluated. Normal thyroid function was obtained for 86% of patients.
Under treatment, 7 patients have had developped multinodular goiter. An increase
of goiter volume was observed for 4 patients among 6 patients who initially
presented goiter.
Total thyroidectomy was decided secondarily for 2 patients after 27 and 34 years
of diagnosing thyroid dyshormonogenesis. This thyroidectomy has been indicated
for a compressive goiter for one patient and for a suspected nodules for the
second. The histopathologic findings were in favor of benignity.
Conclusion
The absence of neonatal screening of congenital hypothyroidism in Tunisia is
responsible of diagnostic and therapeutic important delay.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1007
EP1008
Soluble (Pro)rennin receptor levels in patients with graves disease
Yuki Mizuguchi, Midori Yatabe, Junichi Yatabe, Yasufumi Seki,
Michita Niyama, Kanako Bokuda, Daisuke Watabnabw, Takashi Ando,
Satoshi Morimoto & Atsuhiro Ichihara
Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Department of Medicine II,
Endocrinology and Hypertension, Tokyo, Japan.
Background
(Pro)renin receptor[(P)RR] is a multi-functioning transmembrane protein which
plays key roles in the regulation of tissue renin-angiotensin system (RAS). (P)RR
is cleaved by furin to generate soluble (P)RR[s(P)RR], which is secreted into
extracellular space. We previously reported that high blood concentration of s(P)
RR indicates poor organ prognosis in several diseases. In this way, s(P)RR is
expected as a candidate biomarker for reflecting the tissue RAS status, but its
regulating factor remains unclear. We also reported the positive relationship
between  serum  s(P)RR  concentration  and  thyroid  function  in  hypertensive
patients,  which  suggests  that  the  enhanced  metabolism  might  regulate  the
synthesis of s(P)RR.
Methods
We measured serum s(P)RR concentration in untreated patients with Graves
disease
(GD,  nZ52),  hashimoto  disease
(nZ23),  acromegary  (nZ11)  and
pheochromocytoma (nZ15). We also assessed the relationship between back-
ground factor associated with endocrine disease and serum s(P)RR levels.
Results
In patients with GD, serum s(P)RR levels (27.51G0.75 ng/ml) were significantly
higher than the levels of normal subject (21.94G0.29 ng/ml). There was no
significant change of s(P)RR levels in other endocrine disease patients. The GD
patients with low BMI (%22 kg/m2) showed higher levels of serum s(P)RR, while
serum s(P)RR levels was positively correlated with BMI in normal subject. The
GD patients with high level of s(P)RR (O27 ng/ml) showed treatment-resistant
against medication (RRZ2.62).
Conclusion
Serum s(P)RR levels were significantly high in GD patients with low BMI and
high levels of serum s(P)RR levels predict a resistance for medication. These
results suggests that poor nutritional condition caused by the excess of thyroid
hormone may stimulate the s(P)RR production, leading to the RAS-related organ
damage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1008
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1009
Conjunctival impression cytology is worsened in Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis without thyroid associated ophthalmopathy
Mustafa Altay1, Tugba Sahin2, Zennure Yildiz2, Gulcin Simsek3,
Mehmet Citirik4, Ihsan Ates5 & Muharrem Bitiren3
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kec¸ioren Training and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Ophtalmology,
Keçioren Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;3Department of
Pathology, Keçioren Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;4SB
Ankara Ulucanlar Eye Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;
5Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara Numune Training and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
We  aimed  to  investigate  the  conjunctival  surface  changes  in  Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis (HT) patients and controls comparatively, and search the correlation of
these changes with thyroid functions and thyroid autoantibody level in patients
without thyroid associated ophthalmopathy (TAO).
Methods
A total of 25 patients with HT and 33 healthy individuals were enrolled in the
study. Serum TSH, fT4  and fT3  level, and anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO)
levels were studied and then, they had thyroid ultrasonography. Following the
routine eye examinations, Schirmer test was applied to determine the dry eye and
specimen were taken from the temporal bulbar conjunctiva with a cellulose
acetate membrane filter for the conjunctival impression cytology.
Results
We found; 1. Grade 2-3 conjunctival squamous metaplasia was more frequently
seen in HT than controls (48% vs 6.1%, P ! 0.001). 2. Patients who have Grade 3
changes had increased serum TSH and anti-TPO, decreased fT4 levels. 3. Serum
Anti-TPO level and BMI were detected as independent predictors of worsening at
the conjunctival impression cytology.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we showed for the first time that conjunctiva was affected in HT
distinct from TAO and anti-TPO levels and obesity were possible triggering
factors on this process.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1009
EP1010
The effects of iodoprophylaxis on thyroid volume and nodular size
during pregnancy in an iodine-sufficient area
Susana Pérez-Naranjo, Pablo Abellán, Agustín Ángel Merchante,
Olalla Rubio, Roser Querol & Pilar Cubells
Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Hospital General de Castellón,
Castellón de la Plana, Spain.
Introduction
During pregnancy, the thyroid volume (TV) increases by 20% to 35% in areas
with iodine deficiency. In iodine-sufficient countries, while some studies showed
an increase in TV by 10-15%, others did not observe any change in TV during
pregnancy. Thyroid nodules may be present in up to 15-35% of pregnant women
in  areas  with  moderate  iodine  deficiency.  However,  in  areas  with  iodine-
sufficient, thyroid nodules were investigated in a few number of studies
Objective
We aimed to evaluate the TV and prevalence of thyroid nodules during pregnancy
in an iodine-sufficient area.
Study design
We prospectively followed, in an iodine-sufficient area, 205 pregnant women
(mean age 32.98G5.01 years) in the first-trimester (1T) and 65 control group of
non-pregnant healthy women matched by age and body mass index. Pregnant
women were supplemented with 200 mg of iodine daily. We evaluated thyroid
hormone levels, ultrasound examination of thyroid and urine iodine concentration
(UIC) in the 1T, and thyroid nodules in the third-trimester (3T).
Results
The pregnant women group showed: median UIC 193 mg/l, mean serum TSH
3.44G1.96 mUI/l and mean TV 9.17G3.30 ml in the 1T. Twenty-two women
had thyroid nodules on thyroid ultrasonography at the 1T. The number of nodules
and the maximum diameter of dominant nodule did not change in the 3T (11.2G
4.2 ml against 10.2G4.2 ml in the 1T). The control group of non-pregnant women
showed: median UIC 143 mg/l, mean serum TSH 2.75G2.02 mUI/l and mean TV
8.07G2.20 ml. Ten women had thyroid nodules on thyroid ultrasonography
(15.38%).
Conclusions
In an iodine-sufficient area as Spain, during pregnancy, the TV increase by
13.63% and is associated with urine iodine concentration. Thyroid nodules were
present in 10.73% of pregnant women and did not increased in the 3T.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1010
EP1011
Changes in thyroid ultrasound during the first trimester of pregnancy
are not related to levels of TSH
Susana Pérez-Naranjo, Agustín Ángel Merchante, Olalla Rubio,
Pilar Cubells, Roser Querol & Pablo Abellán
Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Hospital General Universitario de
Castellón, Castellón de la Plana, Spain.
Introduction
The changes observed in thyroid ultrasound during pregnancy are related to the
nutritional status of iodine, but its association with TSH levels or the presence of
thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb) is unclear.
Objective
To compare the relationship between the findings in thyroid ultrasound and
thyroid function tests in the first trimester of pregnancy in an iodine sufficient
area.
Subjects and methods
We conducted an observational cohort study and included 205 pregnant women
(mean age 32.9G5.0 years) in the 1(st) trimester, recruited from universal
screening. We performed a nutritional survey and we measure urinary iodine,
TSH, free T4, free T3 and TPOAb. Through a thyroid ultrasound we evaluate the
thyroid volume, ultrasound textura and the number and size of thyroid nodules.
We performed the comparison between the different variables according to their
levels of TSH, and established three subgroups: TSH% 2.5, 2.6-4 and O 4 mU/l,
with 65, 70 and 70 pregnant women in each group respectively.
Results
We found no statistically significant differences between pregnant women by
levels of TSH in age, urinary iodine, percentage of positive TPOAb, thyroid
volume, thyroid texture, and number of nodules. The pregnant woman with higher
TSH levels had higher BMI, higher levels of free T4, higher titers of TPOAb and
increased consumption of iodized salt. In the univariate analysis only the presence
of positive TPOAb (and not the presence of elevated TSH levels) was associated
with the presence of goiter (rZ0.26; P! 0.01) and heterogeneous echotexture
(rZ0.72; P! 0.001).
Conclusions
We found no significant differences in the nutritional status of iodine, in the
thyroid volume, in the prevalence of goiter or nodule prevalence in pregnant
women according to their levels of TSH. Ultrasound abnormalities found in the
first trimester of pregnancy appear to be linked with the presence of TPOAb.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1011
EP1012
Central/Peripheral vascularization and resistance index at Doppler
ultrasound examination of thyroid nodules: are they useful to
differentiate between benign and malignant pathology?
Néstor Pacenza, Melanie Rosmarin, Evelin Blan, Sol Serrano,
Claudia Cejas, Noelia Sforza, Leonardo Serrano, Adriana Campero,
Santiago Frid, María Cristina Faingold & Gabriela Brenta
Dr. Cesar Milstein Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Thyroid Doppler ultrasound (TDUS) is highly used in the evaluation of thyroid
nodules (TN). Malignant thyroid pathology has been more frequently associated
with central vascularization of such nodules. There is controversy regarding the
usefulness of the Resistance Index (RI) in the assessment of TN.
Our aim was to analyze the utility of vascularization characteristics and RI at
TDUS in the distinction of benign and malignant TN.
Materials and methods
Characteristics of vascularization (peripheral or central and peripheral) and RI
(estimated by blood flow speed at the prominent artery at TDUS) were analyzed in
all patients who underwent thyroid surgery and had an US-guided fine needle
aspiration  biopsy
(FNAB)  performed  in  our institution  from  June
2011  to
November 2015.
Results
Sixty two patients were included, 60 women and 2 men. Mean age was 68.2G6.8
years. Twenty two patients resulted in malignant (mostly papillary carcinoma)
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
and 40  in benign  pathology  (mostly  follicular  adenomas  and adenomatous
nodules). Fifteen patients had 2 TN evaluated, leading to a total of 77 nodules (50
benign and 27 malignant).
We found no significant difference between RI of benign and malignant nodules:
0.59G0.09 vs. 0.60G0.10 respectively.
Thirty one TN showed peripheral vascularization (PV) exclusively: 20 were
benign (64.5%) and 11 malignant (35.5%). Fourty six exhibited central and
peripheral vascularization (C/PV): 30 were benign (65.2%) and 16 malignant
(34.8%).  There  was  not  statistically  significant  difference  between  both.
Sensitivity for C/PV for malignant pathology was 34.8% and specificity was
64.5%.
Conclusion
In our experience, characteristics of vascularization (peripheral or central and
peripheral) and the RI of TN at TDUS alone were not useful to distinguish
between benign and malignant pathology in our population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1012
EP1013
Evaluation of thyroid function tests in patients with acute kidney injury
Hanise Ozkan1, Yildiz Okuturlar2, Hakan Kocoglu2, Irem Kirac Utku1,
Esra Demir1, Ozlem Harmankaya2, Mehmet Palaz2, Bugra Oztosun2,
Meral Mert3, Aysegul Kudu4, Sibel Kocak Yucel4 & Abdulbaki Kumbasar2
1Department of Internal Medicine, Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Education and
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine,
Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey;3Department of Endocrinology, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk
Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;4Department of
Nephrology, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Education and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey.
Aim
Euthyroid sick syndrome can be described as abnormal findings on thyroid
function tests that occur in the setting of a nonthyroidal illness (NTI) without
preexisting hypothalamic-pituitary and thyroid gland dysfunction. In this study
we tried to compare thyroid function tests between patients with acute kidney
injury (AKI) and healthy controls.
Materials and Methods
This study consisted of 31 patients with AKI and 26 healthy controls. All patients’
physical examination findings, laboratory data, comorbid illnesses were recorded
and compared with healthy subjects.
Results
Of the patients group 69.2% patients were female and of the control group 64.5%
patients were female. Also of the patients 25.8% had diabetes mellitus, 16.1% had
hypertension, %16.1 had cancer, 12.9% had cardiovascular disease, 9.7% had
acute gastroenteritis, 38.7% had urinary tract infection, 9.7% had pneumonia.
Mean creatinine value in the patients group was 4.70G2.17 and in the control
group was 1.10G0.28 mg/dl (PZ0.0001). There were no significant differences
in TSH and fT4 levels between patients and controls whereas fT3 levels were
significantly lower in patients group (PZ0.0001). No correlation was determined
between creatinine and age, body mass index, fT4, TSH but there was a positive
correlation between creatinine and urea (rZ0.691, PZ0.0001) and there was a
negative correlation between creatinine and fT3 (rZK0.691, PZ0.0001).
Discussion
The frequency of thyroid function abnormalities is related to the magnitude of the
illness. The most common abnormality is a T3 reduction, occurring in about
40-100% of cases of NTI, which parallels the increase of rT3. As the disease
severity increases, T4 levels also decrease. Most patients who are critically ill
have reduced T4 levels. In patients who are hospitalized with an NTI, about 10%
have abnormally low TSH values. As in chronic kidney disease, fT3 levels could
be a marker for euthyroid sick syndrome in patients with AKI.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1013
EP1014
Is there seasonality in the month of birth of patients with autoimmune
thyroid diseases?
Ana M Ramos-Leví1, Ana Serrano-Somavilla1, Rebeca
Martinez-Hernandez1, Miguel Sampedro-Nu
˜ ez1, Alicia Vicu
˜a1,
Marlen Vitales-Noyola2 & Mónica Marazuela1
1Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Instituto de Investigación Princesa,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain;2Department of
Immunology, School of Medicine, UASLP, San Luis Potosi, Mexico.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Background
Graves’ disease (GD) and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) are common disorders
with an autoimmune etiology, which are known as autoimmune thyroid diseases
(AITD). A specific seasonal pattern of the month of birth has been suggested in
several autoimmune disorders, supporting the hypothesis of a link between viral
infections and the development of aberrant immune-regulatory mechanisms.
However, there are few studies which specifically address this issue in AITD.
Materials and Methods
We reviewed the month of birth of a large cohort of patients with AITD at a single
tertiary-care reference hospital. We compared this cohort with the total number of
newborns in our city between 1996 and 2011. Chi-square and Hewitt tests were
used to analyze seasonality.
Results
We included a total of 417 patients (270 GD and 147 HT), 357 (85.6%) women,
with a mean age of 49.1G14.3 years old. January, May and November were the
months in which the majority of patients were born. The winter/summer ratio was
0.98. Hewitt test was not statistically significant (for kZ3, TZ24, PZ0.992; for
kZ6, TZ40, PO0.880). Taking the number of births in each month in Madrid as
reference values, there were no significant differences between the number of
births  observed  in patients  with AITD and the number  of births  expected
throughout the whole cohort. There were no differences in the percentage of births
in each month between sexes or between the types of AITD (GD vs TH).
Seasonality was neither observed for the month of diagnosis in patients with GD
(for kZ3, TZ24, PZ0.992).
Conclusions
Our results suggest that there is no specific seasonal pattern in the month of birth
in patients with AITD. This could favor the hypothesis of further mechanisms
involved in the development of autoimmunity, different from those observed in
other autoimmune diseases in which a seasonality was observed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1014
EP1015
Cardiovascular risk assessment using serum hs-CRP and Framingham
risk score in newly diagnosed Graves’ disease patients
Sorina Martin1,2, Minodora Betivoiu1, Suzana Florea3 & Simona Fica1,2
1Endocrinology Department, Elias Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;
2Endocrinology Department, Carol Davila University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;3Laboratory Department, Elias Hospital,
Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
In hyperthyroid patients mortality is increased by 20%, the major causes of death
being cardiovascular disorders. Recent data suggest that subclinical or treated
thyroid disease is associated with increased long-term vascular risk despite
restoration of euthyroidism.
Methods
We measured high-sensitivity C reactive protein
(hs-CRP)  in
116
newly
diagnosed Graves’ disease (GD) patients, without prior antithyroid treatment.
Levels of hs-CRP !1 mg/l are associated with a low cardiovascular risk, between
1-3 mg/l  with  medium  risk  and  O3 mg/l  with  high  risk.  We  calculated
Framingham risk score in 97 patients, using as risk factors: the presence of
arterial hypertension, total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, age, sex and smoking
status. Individuals with low risk have
%10% CHD risk at 10 years, with
intermediate risk 10-20%, and with high risk R20%. Patients ! 20 years old,
with diabetes mellitus, known cardiac diseases or symptoms were excluded.
Results
The mean value of serum hs-CRP was 4.13G7.71 mg/l, medianeZ1.80, IQRZ
4.59 mg/l. Serum hs-CRP mediane level of 1.80 mg/l is asociated with a medium
cardiovascular risk. Framingham risk score had a mean value of 2.84G3.58% S.D.
and a mediane of 1, intervalZ1-16, IQRZ2%. Framingham score placed the
majority of patients (91.8%) in a low cardiovascular risk category and only 8.2%
in an intermediate risk category, with no patients in the high risk category.
Framingham risk score was higher in men compared to women (medianeZ4.50,
IQRZ11 vs medianeZ1, IQRZ2%, P!0.001). Intermediate risk patients were
older than patients in the low risk group (64.13G10.30 vs 43.89G13.68 years,
P!0.001).
Conclusions
Serum hs-CRP values placed GD patients in a medium cardiovascular risk while
Framingham risk score placed the majority of patients in low risk group, !10%
within the next 10 years. Considering the increased morbidity and mortality
associated with hyperthyroidism the development of a specific cardiovascular risk
score for this specific category of patients could be useful.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1015
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1016
Total thyroidectomy in refractory amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis:
a case series of 12 patients
Tilman Drescher1, Thomas Clerici2, Walter Kolb2, Michael Brändle1 &
Stefan Bilz1
1Division of Endocrinology, Kantonsspital, St. Gallen, Switzerland;
2Department of Surgery, Kantonsspital, St. Gallen, Switzerland.
Introduction
Amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT) occurs in 5-10% of patients and may
occur at any time throughout the course of treatment including months after
discontinuation.  Two  distinct  forms  of  AIT  are  distinguished  and  treated
differently.  Iodine-induced  hyperthyroidism,  typically  seen  in  patients  with
underlying thyroid disease, is referred to as typ1 AIT and treated with high doses
of thionamide antithyroid drugs and perchlorate. Type 2 AIT is a destructive
thyroiditis and most cases respond to high-dose glucocorticoids. However, mixed
forms  and  refractory  cases  are  occasionally  observed  and  prolongued
hyperthyroidism may lead to siginificant morbidity, especially in patients with
significant cardiac comorbidities. Thyroidectomy rapidly restores normal thyroid
function but must be performed in still overtly hyperthyroid often critically ill
patients.
Methods
Retrospective analysis of the clinical records of all 12 patients with AIT, who
underwent total thyroidectomy at the Department of Surgery, Kantonsspital St.
Gallen, since 2006.
Results/cases
The age of the patients ranged from 50-81 years and 2 were female. All patients
had an underlying structural cardiac disease and 8 had an ICD. All patients had
been treated with thionamides, glucocorticoids or both for 3-10 weeks prior to
surgery.  Indications  for  total  thyroidectomy  included  unresponsiveness  to
medical treatment and worsening of the underlying cardiac condition in several
cases. Euthyroidism was restored quickly in all subjects. The length of the
postoperative hospital stay ranged from 2-5 days and temporary intensive care
was required in 3 patients. One patient died 3 weeks after surgery because of
multiple  preexisting  complications.  All  other  patients  were  euthyroid  on
levothyroxin replacement and in stable or improved cardiac condition for at
least 1 year.
Conclusion
Total thyroidectomy is an effective and safe treatment in patients with AIT
unresponsive to medical therapy and should be considered early to prevent
subsequent cardiac morbidity due to prolongued overt hyperthyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1016
EP1017
Accuracy of repeated core biopsy (CB) after inadequate first CB in
thyroid nodules
Miguel Paja1,2, Rosa Zabala1, Igone Korta1, Alba Zabalegui1,
Maddalen Dublang1, Maite Pérez de Ciriza1, Aitzol Lizarraga1,2 &
Aitziber Ugalde1
1Hospital Basurto, Bilbao, Basque Country, Spain;2Basque Country
University, Bilbao, Basque Country, Spain.
In our centre, thyroid core-biopsy (CB) has replaced fine needle aspiration biopsy
(FNAB) in the study of thyroid nodules because its better accuracy. International
guidelines recommend repeating the FNA in cases of inadequate or insufficient
first specimen, but nothing is published about the case in failed CB.
Objective
To study the differences between nodules with inadequate and diagnostic thyroid
Core Biopsy and the accuracy of repeating a CB after a previous inadequate
result.
Methods
Methods of 3.972 CB performed along ten years (2005-2015) in 3.384 patients,
139
(3.5%) were considered inadequate for diagnosis, due to insufficient tissue,
intense fibrosis or bad processing. CB was performed using an 18G spring-loaded
device.  We  standardized  four  diagnostic  categories:  insufficient,  benign,
microfollicular proliferation and malignant.
Results
Patients with inadequate CB were younger than the patients with diagnostic
biopsies
(53.7 vs 57 y-o; p: 0.012). Mean nodule diameter was smaller in
insufficient CB (20.6 mm vs 25.9 mm), isthmic localization was more frequent
(19.5% vs. 7%). and they were less frequently predominantly solid (50% vs.
70.5%). In 22 cases, simultaneous FNA were conducted in predominantly cystic
nodules, eleven of them diagnostic in cytological study, all of them benign.
In 51 cases a second CB was performed being diagnostic in 48 cases (94.1%), 45
of them hyperplasic tissue, 2 follicular proliferations and 1 papillary thyroid
cancer. Surgery was performed in 10 cases which confirmed the diagnosis in the
last 3 cases, two follicular adenomas and one PTC, and in another 7 benign lesions.
Conclusion
Second CB has 94.1% of successful sampling. Most nodules with non-diagnostic
initial CB are benign. Combination of 2 thyroid CB allows a diagnosis in nearly
all thyroid nodules.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1017
EP1018
The prevalence of iodothyronine deiodinase genes and their association
with neuropsychological status in Korean hypothyroid patients
Jae Hoon Chung1, Sun Wook Kim1, Hye Jeong Kim3, Seo Young Sohn2,
Young Nam Kim1, You-Bin Lee1, Hye-In Kim1 & Seung-Eun Lee1
1Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea;2Myongji Hospital, Seonam University College
of Medicine, Goyang, Republic of Korea;3Soonchunhyang University
Hospital, Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
Background
Three  deiodinase  genes
(DIO)  play  an  important  role  in  thyroid  hormone
metabolism. Among them, type 2 iodothyronine deiodinase (DIO2) converts T4
to T3 in brain and impaired psychological well-being was reported in minor
variants of DIO2. However, the prevalence of three DIOs and their relation to
neuropsychological status has not been evaluated in Asian hypothyroid subjects.
Methods
We prospectively enrolled 196 subjects who were taking levothyroxine between
Nov. 2012 and May 2015 at Samsung Medical Center. We analyzed 19 single
nucleotide  polymorphisms
(SNPs)  in  the  three  deiodinase  genes  using
MassARRAY  matrix-assisted  laser  desorption  ionization  time-of-flight
(MALDI-TOF)  mass  spectrometry  (Sequenom,  San  Diego,  CA,  USA).  We
assessed the neuropsychological status by the six questionnaires and identified the
association between DIO variants and well-being scores.
Results
Thyroid cancer patients (nZ60) who underwent total thyroidectomy and patients
with chronic autoimmune thyroiditis (nZ136) showed similar distributions of
DIO variants and questionnaire scores. The prevalence of minor homozygote in
four DIO2 SNPs tested was 2% (rs12885300), 4% (rs225011), 14% (rs225014)
and 14% (rs225015). Questionnaire scores (HADS-Anxiety, HADS-Depression
and Brief Fatigue Inventory) in minor homozygote of DIO2 SNPs were worse
than common homozygote and heterozygote, but not significant.
Conclusion
Worse neuropsychological scores seemed to be related to minor variants of DIO2
SNPs in subjects with thyroid disease. This issue should be validated in further
larger studies to clarify the relevance between psychological status and DIO
variants as well as the improvement of well-being using T3/T4 combination or T4
monotherapy in subjects with minor variants.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1018
EP1019
Anti neutiphil cytoplasmic antibodies & hyperthyroidism in fayoum
(Egypt)
Mohamed Mashahit & Doaa Khattab
Fayoum University, Fayoum, Egypt.
Background
It was noted in the last few years there was an increased incidence of vasculitis
and vasculitic reactions in patients with thyrotoxicosis. Those vasculitic reactions
ranged from simple purpuric skin lesion to sever intra-alveolar hemorrhage and
even to Steven Johnson Syndrome, Most of those vasculitic reactions occurred in
patients receiving propylthiouracil or methimazole. But many other cases were
detected in thyrotoxic patients even before starting to receive those medications.
Aim
The aim of this work is to clarify whether the vasculatic lesions associated with
hyperthyroidism were due to anti-thyroid medications or due to the hyperthyroid
diseases itself or due to both of them.
Methods
This study included 125 subjects divided into 4 groups, group -1 included patients
with newly diagnosed autoimmune hyperthyroidism, 2- newly diagnosed non
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
immune hyperthyroidism, 3- patients receiving propylthyouracil and 4- patients
receiving methemazol , all routine labs and P-ANCA were done for all the
patients as well as the control group
Results
It was found that p ANCA level was higher in patients with autoimmune
hyperthyroididism  than  the  non  immune  hyperthyroidism
(PZ0.002) also
p-ANCA level was higher in patients with protienurea than those with normal
urine analysis (P-value 0.01). also p ANCA was significantly higher in patients
with both arthralgia and or skin rash, than those without these findings. (P-value
!0.01). There was statistically significant positive strong correlation between
p-ANCA  level and dose of propylthyouracil or methemazol  given to treat
hyperthyroidism (P-value !0.05) and statistically significant positive correlation
between  p-ANCA  level  and  duration  of  treatment
(P-value!0.05.)  While
correlation between p-ANCA and thyroid hormones profiles after controlling of
dose and duration of treatment, revealed that There was no statistically significant
correlation between p-ANCA level and level of T3, T4 and TSH.
Keywords: P-ANCA, thyrotoxicosis, propylthyouracil and methemazol
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1019
EP1020
Recurrent sub acute thyroiditis lacking diagnostic imaging features:
atypical scenario
Muhammad Rashid1, Muhammad Naeemul Haq1, Najmul Islam1,
Bella Khan2 & Zareen Kiran1
1Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan;2National institute of
Cardiovascular Diseases, Karachi, Pakistan.
Introduction
Diagnosis of sub acute thyroiditis is readily considered in a patient presenting
with  classical  history  and  characteristic  clinical  features.  Confirmation  of
diagnosis is based on particular set of laboratory investigations and supported
by characteristic imaging findingsof Tc-99 scan. However, prescence of sub acute
thyroiditis with normal thyroid scintigraphy findings is exceedingly rare.
Case report
51 years old postmenopausal female with history of recurrent sub acute thyroiditis
10 years back presented with pain in neck initially over right side then later over
the left for one and half month and fever for three days, heat intolerance, sleep
disturbances,  restlessness.  Physical  examination  revealed  enlargement  and
marked tenderness over the thyroid initially more marked on left side and after
few days over the right side. Thyroid profile showed TSH 0.023 ulU/ml, FT4
2.31 ng/dl, FT3 2.74 ng/dl and TSH 0.008 ulU/ml, FT4 2.64 ng/dl, and FT3
2.5 ng/dl on two separate occasions. ESR was 94 mm/hr. Tc-99 m pertechnetate
scintigraphy showed bilateral normal homogenous uptake. Clinical diagnosis of
sub  acute  thyroiditis  was  made.  Prednisolone  started  in  tapering  dose.
Improvement in symptoms with normalization of ESR of 08 mm/hour and FT4
of 1.04 ng/dl occurred after taking prednisolone for six weeks at follow up.
Conclusion
This case presenting with typical clinical features of sub acute thyroiditis and
elevated ESR but lack characteristic imaging emphasizes upon diagnosis of sub
acute thyroiditis on the basis of history, physical examination and laboratory data
even if thyroid scintigraphy findings are not in favor of disease.
Keywords: sub acute thyroidis, recurrent, normal thyroid scintigraphy
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1020
EP1021
Evaluation of theurapeutic modalities of Graves’ disease
Fatma Saglam1, Derya Koseoglu1, Eda Demir Onal1, Yavuz Yalcin2,
Dilek Berker1 & Serdar Guler1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Numune Research and
Training Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Sisli Memorial Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Objective
Radioiodine (RAI), surgical and anti-thyroid drug therapy are the main options to
treat Graves’ disease (GD). The aim of this study was to investigate theurapeutic
options, their efficacy and adverse reactions of prophilthiouracil
(PTU) and
methimazole (MMI).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Design
A total of 650 patients with GD were evaluated retrospectively. Treatments,
adverse reactions, clinical and laboratory results were recorded. After 18 months
of primary medical treatment, recurrence rates of MMI and PTU were compared
by the following one year.
Results
Mean age was 42.2G13.6. Of the patients, %55.4 (nZ360) were treated with
MMI and 44.6% (nZ290) with PTU. RAI and surgery treatment were applied
9.4% vs 7.4% respectively because of adverse reactions or unable to achieve
euthyroidism  with  maximum  dose  of  drugs  or  malignity  suspicion.
%16.6
(nZ108) of patients were still continuing to take anti-thyroid treatment. 66.6%
(nZ433) of the patients completed 18 month-period of the therapy and %61.2
(nZ256) of them were in remission by the following 1 year. Recurrence were
detected in 38.8% (nZ168) of the patients and they were all treated with RAI
(72%) and surgery (28%). %14.6 of patients (95/650) underwent surgery. Thyroid
nodules were detected in 26.3% (nZ171) of the patients. Papillary thyroid cancer
were detected in 9.5% (nZ10). Thyroid ophthalmopathy were seen in 8.6%
(nZ56). Adverse reactions of drugs were found in 6.9% (nZ45) (with 2.5% of
skin,
2.3%  of  hepatotoxicity,
1.8%  of  temporary  neutropenia,
0.6%  of
agranulocytosis). there were not significance difference between MMI and PTU
in terms of adverse effects.
Conclusion
Remission rates of medical treatment were high although minor and major
adverse drug reactions were seen in the treatment of GD. We could not detect
difference in terms of advers effects of MMI and PTU. They could be used safely.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1021
EP1022
Changes in irisin, titin and dystrophin concentrations in patients with
overt thyroid dysfunction
Ariadna Zybek-Kocik, Nadia Sawicka-Gutaj, ElŻbieta Wrotkowska,
Jerzy Sowin´ ski & Marek Ruchała
Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine,
Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Introduction
Many original research studies describes significant impact of thyroid hormones
on muscle tissue. Hypo- and hyperthyroidism cause both functional and structural
damage of muscles presented by many signs and symptoms of thyroid myopathy.
Thus, it is interesting to compare the impact of thyroid dysfunction on hormones
secreted by muscles - myokines.
Aim
The main goal of the project is to assess serum concentration of three myokines -
irisin, titin and dystrophin and creatine kinase (CK) in patients with thyroid
function impairment (overt hypo- and hyperthyroidisim) and in healthy control
subjects.
Methods
The study enrolled 97 patients, newly diagnosed with overt thyroid dysfunction
(48 with hypothyroidism and 49 with hyperthyroidism) and 40 healthy control
subjects. Additionally, patients diagnosed with hypothyroidism were divided into
two subgroups - long-lasting and short-term dysfunction. All subjects underwent
routine clinical examination, laboratory tests (irisin, titin, dystrophin, thyroid-
stimulating hormone - TSH, free thyroid hormones, anti-thyroid autoantibodies
and CK concentrations), and thyroid ultrasound examination.
Results
The  mean  serum  irisin  level  was  lower  in  patients  with  long-lasting
hypothyroidism than in other three groups
(P!0.05). There was generally
statistical difference in dystrophin levels between groups (PZ0.035), with the
highest dystrophin level in healthy controls and lowest in hyperthyroid patients,
however  post  hoc  analysis  revealed  the  values  at  the  border  of  statistical
significance (PZ0.076) between these groups. Similarly, the highest titin levels
were presented by healthy controls, and the lowest by hyperthyroid patients
(PZ0.011) and group with long-lasting hypothyroidism (PZ0.052). CK levels
were statistically higher in long-lasting and short-term hypothyroidism than in
hyperthyroid and control subjects (P!0.05).
Conclusions
Obtained  results  suggest  that  impact  of  thyrometabolic  state  varies  among
described myokins. This might be explained with multiply impact of hypo- and
hyperthyroidism  on  muscle  tissue,  both  dysfunction  and  destruction
-
demonstrated with high CK level.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1022
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1023
Thyroid function parameters in Polish pregnant women
Malgorzata Trofimiuk-Muldner1,2, Zbigniew Szybinski4,
Grzegorz Sokolowski2, Agnieszka Stefanska2, Monika Buziak-Bereza1,2,
Zbigniew Adamczewski3, Andrzej Lewinski3 & Alicja Hubalewska-
Dydejczyk1,2
1Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University Medical
College, Krakow, Poland;2Department of Endocirnology, University
Hospital in Krakow, Krakow, Poland;3Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolic Diseases, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland;4Polish
Council for Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders, Krakow, Poland.
Thyroid function in pregnancy differs between populations. The aim of the study
was to assess thyroid parameters in Polish pregnant women. It included 1095
pregnant volunteers aged 16-42 years (174, 501, 420 in the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
trimester, respectively), who gave their informed written consent. In each woman
thyroid ultrasound was performed, 90.7% had TSH, fT4 and a-TPO measured,
and 84.0% iodine urinary concentration (UIC) in urine spot sample estimated.
Results
Median UIC in study group was 92.3 mg/l. UIC above 150 mg/l was noted in
22.3% of women. Median, 2.5 and 97.5 percentile for TSH were 1.6, 0.13 and
4.97 mIU/l, respectively; for fT4 12.3, 8.72 and 17.92, respectively; for a-TPO
10.7, 8 and 16.4 IU/l, respectively. 88.6% of women were a-TPO. Median, 2.5 and
97.5 percentile for TSH in those subjects were 1.57, 0.10 and 4.76 mIU/l,
respectively. Median, 2.5 and 97.5 percentile for TSH in the 1st trimester were
1.18, 0.029 and 6.08 mIU/l, respectively; in the 2nd trimester: 1.71, 0.22 and 4.87
mIU/l, respectively; in the 3rd trimester: 1.60, 0.35 and 4.97 mIU/l, respectively.
TSH level R 2.5 mIU/l was observed in 19.1% of women in the 1st trimester, and
TSH R 3 mIU/l - in 13.9% in the 2nd or 3rd trimester. Median, LQ and UQ for
thyroid volume were 12.05, 9.44 and 15.07 ml, respectively. Thyroid nodules
were noted in 21.1% of women, thyroid nodules O 1 cm - in 6.6%.
Conclusions
The study indicated that in iodine deficient pregnant women TSH levels are
higher  than  recommended  by  current  guidelines.  The  adequate  iodine
supplementation should be provided, and the threshold for L-thyroxin treatment
implementation in such population should be revised.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1023
EP1024
Skin autofluorescence and serum carboxymethyllysine levels in
hypothyroid and hyperthyroid patients
Dilek Gogas Yavuz, Dilek Yazici & Sule Temizkan
Marmara University School Of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Levels of thyroid hormones may effect the levels of the glycation product and
those of the oxidation products.
Objective
To evaluate the relationship between skin autofluorescence (SAF), and serum
advanced  glycation  end  products
(AGEs)  parameters  in  hypothyroid  and
hyperthyroid patients.
Method
Newlydiagnosed or untreated 100 overt and subclinical hypothyroid patients
(42G13 yrs) and 50 overt-subclinical hyperthyroid patients (46G13 yrs) and
50 control subjects (47G10 yrs) were enrolled after excluding diabetes. Serum
carboxymethyllysine (CML) and receptor for advanced glycation end products
(sRAGE) levels were measured with ELİZA. TSH and fT4 measured Skin
autofluorescence
(SAF),  a  noninvasive  measurement  method,  reflects  tissue
accumulation  of  AGEs.  Skin  AF  was  measured  using  the  AGE-Reader
(DiagnOptics B.V., Groningen, The Netherlands).
Results
SAF measurements were 1.82G0.04, 1.63G0.3, 1.80G0.4 arbitrary Units (AU)
for  hypothyroid,  euthyroid  and  hyperthyroid  groups  respectively
(PZ0.04)
Serum CML levels were 8.2G2.8 ng/ml, 8.0G3.3 ng/ml and 10.2 ng/ml for
hypothyroid, euthyroid and hyperthyroid groups respectively (PZ0.01). sRAGE
levels were similar between the groups. TSH and SAF was positively correlated
(rZ0.25, PZ0.02) in hypothyroid group while showed a negative correlation in
hyperthyroid group (rZK0.36, PZ0.04). There was no correaliton between
CML and sRAGE levels and SAF.
Conclusion
Accumulation of skin AGEs is increased in hypothyroid and hyperthyroid patients
compared to euthyroid subjects. Thyroid status may modulates glycoxidative and
Modification  of tissue proteins. Although longitudinal studies needed, SAF
measurement, as a noninvasive method, may be useful for identification of
clinical risk factors in hypo and hyperthyroid patients
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1024
EP1025
Ectopic thyroid tissue in the midline of the neck coexisting with a
normally located thyroid gland
Veronica Marin1, Raluca Trifanescu1,2, Anda Dumitrascu1,
Dumitru Ioachim1, Andrei Goldstein1 & Catalina Poiana1,2
1‘C.I. Parhon’ National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;
2‘Carol Davila’ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Ectopic thyroid tissue (ETT) is a rare entity; it is more frequent in women (80%)
and is usually located along the obliterated thyroglossal duct. ETT in the midline
is even rarer (1.79%). Incidence of malignancy in this group is lower than in
orthotopic thyroid nodules.
Case report
A 40 years old woman, resident in iodine sufficient area, but originating from an
iodine deficient area, presented for a midline neck mass. TSH and FT4 were
measured by electrochemiluminescence Ultrasound, 131I scintigraphy, computed
tomography scan and cytological exam by fine needle aspiration biopsy were
performed. There were no compressive symptoms. Clinical examination was
normal, except a 3/2 cm supra sternal mass, homogeneous and painless. Thyroid
function was normal (TSHZ0.71 mIU/l, FT4Z14.2 pmol/l), TPO antibodies
were positive (94 IU/ml) and calcitonin was normal (1 pg/ml). Neck ultrasound
showed a hypoechoic solid nodule 31/16 mm (inhomogeneous with discreet
vascularization) which was situated on the median line, below the lower poles of
the thyroid gland, but without any contact with those. The thyroid scintigraphy
revealed a normal located thyroid with inhomogeneous capture for 131I, and
slight uptake in the mass described by ultrasound. Neck CT scan revealed a mass
in the inferior cervical region and superior mediastinum. FNAB confirmed
thyroid tissue (normal, well- differentiated thyroid follicles, with old and recent
bleedings, associated post haemorrhagic resorption areas- old nodular goiter) and
did not reveal any evidence of malignancy; surgical excision was scheduled.
Conclusions
Midline neck ectopic thyroid tissue is seen very rarely; it should be considered
when we need to investigate a neck mass because it may coexist with a normally
located and functioning thyroid gland.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1025
EP1026
Depression and anxiety in hashimoto thyroiditis after long-term
levothyroxine replacement
Marina Djurovic1, Alberto Pereira2, Zvezdana Jemuovic1, Olga Vasovic3,
Dragan Pavlovic4, Milan Petakov1, Dragana Miljic1 &
Svetozar Damjanovic1
1Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Diseases of Metabolism, Clinical
Centre of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;2Department of
Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands;3Institute for Gerontology and Palliative Care,
Belgrade, Serbia;4Faculty of Philosophy, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,
Serbia.
Introduction
Thyroid dysfunction may cause various psychiatric symptoms and disturbances.
In addition, many factors affect the variable responses to hormone replacement.
Many patients treated for Hashimoto thyroiditis(HT) report persistent impair-
ments in general well-being despite long-term L-thyroxine (LT4) replacement
and restoration of biochemical euthyroidism.
Aim
To investigate the prevalence of depression and anxiety in patients with HT on
long-term LT4 replacement and potential associations with free T4 (FT4), TSH,
and antithyroid peroxidase antibodies (anti-TPO) concentrations.
Subjects and methods
Cross-sectional, case-control study with 120 patients with HT on long-term LT4
replacement and 60 euthyroid control subjects, matched for age, gender, and
educational level. Measurement of TSH, FT4 and anti-TPO was done. Evaluation
of depression and anxiety using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
(HADS) scores(self-reported symptom questionnaire). Patients and controls were
further subdivided according to age: group A (20-49 yrs) and B (50-75 yrs).
Fisher’s ANOVA analysis was used to compare means between (sub)groups.
Spearman’s correlation coefficient(r) was used to assess the correlations between
hormone levels, anti-TPO, and HADS scores.
Results
Patients had higher TSH levels vs. controls in both age groups (A:3.27G1.94 vs.
1.98G1.01, P!0.001; B:3.38G1.86 vs. 0.69G0.90, P!0.001), and higher anti-
TPO (A:2585.5G2813.9 vs 49.8G137.9, P! 0.001 and B:2582.3G2986.9 vs.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
25.7G43.0, P! 0.001). Patients reported more depression and anxiety than
controls: HADSD (A:6.91G4.32 vs. 3.42G3.02, P!0.001; and B:8.29G4.18 vs.
5.74G2.98, PZ0.020) and HADSA (A:9.15G3.70 vs. 7.37G3.22, PO0.05, B:
10.56G4.16 vs. 7.89G3.21, PZ0.009). HADSD correlated positively with both
disease duration (rZ0.418, P!0.001) and therapy duration (rZ0.221, PZ0.019);
while  HADSA  correlated  positively  only  with  disease  duration
(rZ0.292,
P!0.001). HADSD and HADSA correlated positively with TSH (rZ0.246, PZ
0.001 and rZ0.202, PZ0.005 respectively), with anti-TPO (rZ0.170, PZ0.021
and rZ0.169, PZ0.022 respectively); while only HADSD inversely correlated
with FT4 (rZK0.156, PZ0.030) and FT3 (rZK0.166, PZ0.035).
Conclusion
Patients  with  HT  have  more  anxiety  and  depression  despite  long-term
levothyroxine replacement. These symptoms were associated with the duration
of treatment and with higher anti-TPO concentrations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1026
EP1027
Follow-up of serum selenium concentrations in patients receiving
selenium supplementation
Jeannette Molnar & Csaba Balázs
Budai Endocrine Center, Budapest, Hungary.
Selenium (Se) supplementation has been adopted as treatment for patients with
elevated autoantibodies or in patients with mild Graves’ orbitopathy. However,
serum Se concentrations or other markers of Se status are usually not determined
during treatment. The aim of our study was to measure serum Se concentrations at
regular intervals during treatment and to register any side effects.
Twenty  patients  with  mild  orbitopathy  and  twenty  patients  with  active
autoimmune  thyroiditis  participated  in  the  study.  The  following  clinical
parameters were determined: TSH, fT4, fT3, TSH receptor antibodies, anti-
TPO and thyroglobulin antibody levels. In case of orbitopathy, the status of the
orbit was registered at the beginning of the study and during treatment. The
patients received 100 or 200 mg organic or inorganic Se daily. Se levels were
measured before supplementation was started and at regular intervals during
treatment. Altogether 168 serum Se concentrations were determined by hydride
generation atomic absorption spectrometry.
In case of autoimmune thyroiditis, autoantibody levels decreased. Generally,
thyroglobulin  antibody  levels  decreased  faster  with  concurrent  Se  supple-
mentation than anti-TPO levels. In patients with orbitopathy, ATA and clinical
activity scores improved in the majority of study participants and worsened only
in patients whose serum Se levels did not increase. Mean Se concentrations were
83.2G13.4 ng/ml (range: 59.1-92.0 ng/ml) before supplementation started and
136.7G22.0 ng/ml
(range:
118.18-220.84 ng/ml)  up  to  two  years  later
(P!0.001). The effect of Se supplementation varied greatly between patients.
Se levels surpassed the reference range much faster than previously reported.
There were no side effects registered.
These are the first Hungarian data representing the effect of Se supplementation in
patients with autoimmune thyroiditis and mild orbitopathy. Se concentrations
increased  significantly  regardless  whether  organic  or  inorganic  Se  was
administered. In summary, serum Se levels of patients receiving Se supple-
mentation should be controlled regularly, at least every six months.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1027
EP1028
Is the high mean platelet volume associated with inflammation in
subacute thyroiditis?
Eda Simsek1, Faruk Yildiz2, Esra Ademoglu3, Senay Arikan Durmaz4,
Murat Filiz2, Fatih Bingol1, Buket Bingol1, Emine Kartal Baykan2,
Unsal Aydin2, Ahmet Veli Sanibas2 & Ayse Carlioglu2
1Department of Ear, Nose and Throat, Erzurum Region Education and
Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology,
Erzurum Region Education and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;
3Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Abant
Izzet Baysal University, Bolu, Turkey;4Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Kirikkale University, Kirikkale, Turkey.
Introduction and aims
Subacute thyroiditis (ST) is a spontaneous remitting inflammatory disease of
thyroid gland. Although there is no clear evidence for its specific etiology,
multiple factors may responsible for this inflammatory reaction. Mean platelet
volume (MPV) is a new important inflammatory marker that indicates disease
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
activity. Aim of this study is to evaluate MPV value in patients with subacute
thyroiditis.
Materials and methods
Thirty-one patients with subacute thyroiditis [mean age 42.55G11.59 years; body
mass index (BMI) 26.64G1.33 kg/m2] and 52 age- and BMI-matched control
subjects (mean age 37.34G17.81 years, BMI 25.45G6.76 kg/m2) were included
our study. All blood samples in patients with ST were taken at diagnosis. The
MPV was measured in a blood sample collected in Edta. The Beckman Coulter
LH 750 (impedance method) analyzer was used for complete blood counts.
Results
At diagnosis, the mean FT3 levels were 4.34G2.86 pg/ml; FT4 levels were
1.61G1.01 pg/dl; TSH levels in ST were 0.31G0.35 mIU/ml (median 0.16;
minimum level 0.001-maximum level 1 mIU/Ml) whereas the mean FT3 levels
were 4.47G3.53 pg/ml; FT4 levels were 1.32G0.65 pg/dl; TSH levels in control
were 1.58G0.99 (median 1.3; minimum 0.4-maximum 4.6) mIU/ml, P!0.001.
ESR in ST were higher than control (mean ESR 41.04G36.19 in ST group vs.
13.24G13.26 mm/hour in control, P!0.001). However, CRP and white blood
cell count in ST did not find statistically different from control. More importantly,
the MPV was significantly higher in ST group than healthy control (8.79G1.23
and 7.62G0.75 fL, respectively; P!0.0001). MPV had positive correlations
between CRP (rZ0.414; PZ0.013) and ESR (rZ0.74; PZ0.001). There was a
negative correlation between MPV and TSH (rZK0.288; PZ0.017).
Conclusions
According to our knowledge, we demonstrated first time that high MPV value was
associated with subacute thyroiditis. MPV may be a new valuable marker of
disease activity of ST as much as high ESR value.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1028
EP1029
Increased levels of bisphenol a in euthyroid autoimmun thyroiditis
Esra Ademoglu1, Muge Keskin2, Suheyla Gorar3 & Ayse Carlioglu4
1Abant Izzet Baysal University School of Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bolu, Turkey;2Ankara Training and
Research Hospital, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara,
Turkey;3Ankara Training and Research Hospital, Division of Endo-
crinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;4Erzurum Training and
Research Hospital, Division of Endocrinology, Erzurum, Turkey.
Introduction
Autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT), also called Hashimoto thyroiditis or chronic
lymphocytic thyroiditis is characterized by destruction of the thyroid gland
involving apoptosis of thyroid epithelial cells. It usually presents as euthyroidism
or subclinically hypothyroidism, rarely as overt hypothyroidism. The cause of
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is thought to be a combination of genetic susceptibility
and  environmental  factors.  Bisphenol  A
(BPA),  an  endocrine-disrupting
chemical, is the main component of polycarbonate plastics and is one of the
highest volume chemicals in production today. The human population is widely
and  continuously  exposed  to  BPA  through  food,  drinking  water,  dermal
exposures, and inhalation of dusts. Aim of this study is to evaluate circulating
levels of BPA in patients with euthyroid AIT.
Material and methods
Circulating levels of BPA were measured in 20 consecutive patients newly
diagnosed  with  euthyroid  AIT  and
22
euthyroid  controls.  Patients  were
considered to have AIT if they were positive for at least one of either antibodies
against thyroid peroxidase
(AbTPO) and/or antibodies against thyroglobulin
(AbTg), in addition to exhibiting morphological changes consistent with AIT, as
diagnosed by thyroid ultrasound (hypoechogenicity, heterogeneity). Individuals
were classified as euthyroid AIT at diagnosis if they had normal serum TSH (TSH
! 4 mIU/mL) and normal free T4 concentrations. The correlation analysis of
BPA with TSH, free T4, free T3, AbTg, AbTPO were also investigated.
Results
Circulating levels of BPA a was significantly higher in euthyroid AIT compared
with controls
(P!0.05). In correlation analysis, bisphenol a was positively
correlated with anti TPO (rZK0.355, P!0.05).
Conclusion
The present study demonstrated for the first time that circulating bisphenol a
levels  are  increased  in  euthyroid  AIT.  This  result  draws  attention  to  the
circulating levels of bisphenol a in euthyroid AIT and and may shed light on
further researches at this topic.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1029
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1030
Acute suppurative thyroiditis caused by burkholderia cepacia
Ilhan Tarkun, Ozlem Zeynep Akyay, Zeynep Canturk, Berrin Cetinarslan,
Alev Selek & Fatma Tugba Catan
Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey.
Introduction
The thyroid is generally resistant to infections due to its encapsulated location,
high iodine concentration, hydrogen peroxide production, and high levels of
blood and lymphoid circulation therefore acute suppurative thyroiditis is rarely
seen. The most common agents are Staphilococcus and Streptococcus. In this case
we present acute suppurative thyroiditis caused by Burkholdeira cepacia, that is a
rare infectious agent in adults.
Case
34 year-old-male, admitted to our clinic with sudden on-set left- sided neck
swelling with pain and redness. There was no history of chronic disease, recently
upper respiratory tract infection or trauma. A painfull nodule was palpated on the
left  lob  of  his  thyroid  gland.  There  were  monocytosis
1.011!103 ml
(0.00-0.900!103), increased sedimentation rate; 52 mm/h (!20 mm/h) and
C- reactive protein (CRP) level; 14.2 mg/dl (0-0.5). Thyroid hormones were in
normal limits. Neck ultrasonography revealed
6!5 mm high density cystic
complex nodule, increased vascularity of left lobe and reactive lymph nodes
localized at left jugular area. Based on the clinical and laboratory findings, acute
suppurative thyroiditis was decided. Fine needle aspiration from the cystic nodule
and  blood  culture  was  performed  for  the  microbiological  identification.
Amoksicilin-clavulonic acid treatment was started. Ciprofloxacin and amikacin
sensitive Burkholdeira Cepacia identified on the cystic nodule aspiration at the
seventh day of the treatment. Antibiotic treatment switched to the ciprofloxacin.
All the symptoms of the disease were regressed, sedimentation and CRP rates
normalized at the twentieth day of the ciprofloksasin treatment. There was not any
recurrence.
Conclusion
Acute suppurative thyroiditis is a rare infection disease. When the clinician
encountered with acute suppurative thyroiditis, abscess aspiration culture and the
blood culture for the microbiological identification and antibiogram should be
performed. Because rare microorganism would be causative agent of existing
acute suppurative thyroiditis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1030
EP1031
Immunohistochemical expression of coagulation and fibrinolysis
markers in thyroid goiter
Łukasz Mielan´ czyk1, Oliwia Segiet1, Mariusz Deska2, Grzegorz Buła2,
Adam Piecuch1, Graz˙yna Kowalczyk-Ziomek1 & Romuald Wojnicz1
1Medical University of Silesia, School of Medicine with the Division of
Dentistry, Chair and Department of Histology and Embryology, Zabrze,
Poland;2Medical University of Silesia, School of Medicine with the
Division of Dentistry, Chair and Clinical Department of General Surgery,
Bytom, Poland.
Introduction
Endocrine disorders can influence the hemostatic balance. Various abnormalities
of coagulation-fibrinolytic system have been reported in patients with thyroid
dysfunction. The aim of the study was to assess the immunohistochemical
expression and distribution of coagulation and fibrinolysis markers in follicular
cells of thyroid goiter.
Materials and methods
20 patients with thyroid goiter were included in the study: 11 cases with non-toxic
nodular goiter (NTNG) and 9 patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT). Normal
glands  served  as  controls.  In  a  standard  immunohistochemical  procedure,
monoclonal antibodies anti- tissue factor (anti-TF), anti-tissue factor pathway
inhibitor (anti-TFPI), anti-von Willebrand factor (anti-vWF), anti-thrombomo-
dulin (anti-TM), anti-tissue plasminogen activator (anti-tPA), anti-plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 (anti-PAI-1) and anti-D-dimers (anti-DD) were applied. The
percentage of positively stained cells were counted and expressed as a mean value
of at least 10 high power fields (400!).
Results
80% of thyroid goiters demonstrated increased immunoreactivity for TM, 56% of
cases showed up-regulated staining for vWF, 33% of thyroid tissues showed
higher expression of TF, 25% of thyroids revealed enhanced immunopositivity
for DD. In only 10% of goiters overexpression of both TFPI and tPA was found.
PAI-1 level was unaltered in all of the examined thyroid glands. None of the
healthy controls stained positively for these markers.
Conclusions
Abnormalities in the processes of coagulation and fibrinolysis are implicated in
the pathogenesis of thyroid diseases, such as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1031
EP1032
Thyroid scintigraphy findings in patients without thyroid tissue in the
ultrasonography
Gungor Tastekin1, Ahmet Kaya2, Mustafa Kulaksizoglu2, Bugra Saglam1,
Emre Atabek3 & Elif Turan4
1Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of
Nuclear Medicine, Konya, Turkey;2Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram
Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Konya,
Turkey;3Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Medical Faculty,
Department of Pediatrics, Konya, Turkey;4Bozok University, Bozok
University, Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology, Yozgat,
Turkey.
Introduction
Patients that were suspected to have thyroid agenesis on imaging procedures were
retrospectively evaluated.
Methods
Totally 4155 patients had scintigraphy imaging between years of 2010-2015 in
our university. 4021 (96.77%) patients were adults (O18 years) and 134 patients
(3.22%) were in the pediatric population. Among adult population, 3060 (76.1%)
were female, and 1095 (27.2%) were male. In the pediatric population, 85
(63.4%) patients were girls and 49 (36.5%) were boys.
Results
Among  4155  patients,
15
(0.36%)  of  them  had  no  thyroid  tissue  in  the
ultrasonography. In the adult population five patients (0.01%) were found to have
thyroid agenesis in the ultrasonography whom four were women. Mean ages of the
diagnosis was 22 years in the adult population. The oldest diagnosis was 50 years
ago and the newest one was four years ago. In the patient with 50 years of history,
USG appearence was atrophic thyroid tissue where as in the scintigraphy substernal
ectopic thyroid tissue was detected. Three patients had thyroid tissue at the base of
the tongue, and one patient had sublingual thyroid tissue in the scintigraphy.
In the pediatric group, 11 patients (8.95%) were diagnosed as thyroid agenesis in
the ultrasonography. 3 (33.3%) of them were boys and 8 (66.6%) were girls.
Scintigraphic examination showed thyroglossal ectopic tissue in one patient, and in
10 patients, uptake was in the base of the tongue. Four patients (36.6%) were newly
diagnosed hypothyroid patients, Seven patients (63.3%) were on LT4 replacement
therapy. TSH levels were evaluated in these patients (mean 96.3 mU/l).
Conclusion
Adult patients with hypothyroidism may have agenesis rarely but in the pediatric
population it can be seen more frequently so it should be kept in mind especially in
the newly diagnosed patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1032
EP1033
Immunohistochemical assessment of catalase in lesions of thyroid gland
Marek Michalski, Oliwia Segiet, Adam Piecuch, Marlena Brzozowa-
Zasada, Krzysztof Helewski, Marzena Harabin-Słowin´ska &
Romuald Wojnicz
Medical University of Silesia, School of Medicine with the Division of
Dentistry, Chair and Department of Histology and Embryology, Zabrze,
Poland.
Introduction
Catalase  is  an  enzyme,  which  functions  in  the  detoxification  of  hydrogen
peroxide, and is one of the most important antioxidant enzymes in humans. It is
responsible for protecting the cell from oxidative damage by reactive oxygen
species. Catalase promotes growth of cells including T-cells, B-cells, myeloid
leukemia cells, melanoma cells, mastocytoma cells, and normal and transformed
fibroblast cells. Nevertheless, the role of this enzyme in thyroid pathologies is still
not  completely  known,  therefore  the  aim  of  the  study  was  to  assess  the
immunohistochemical expression of catalase in lesions of thyroid gland.
Methods
22 patients with thyroid goiter were included in the study: 13 cases with non-toxic
nodular goiter (NTNG) and 9 patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT). Normal
glands  served  as  controls.  For  immunohistochemistry,  mouse  monoclonal
antibodies against catalase were applied. The investigations were performed by
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
the BrightVision method from Immunologic. The sections were counterstained
with Mayer’s haematoxylin. The number of positively stained cells were counted
and expressed as a mean value of at least 10 high power fields (400!).
Results
The expression of catalase in healthy thyroids was weak or focal. All cases of
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis demonstrated higher expression of catalase in compari-
son with non-toxic nodular goiter and healthy thyroid gland. Positively stained
cells were also detected in infiltrating lymphocytes and macrophages. Only 16%
of NTNG demonstrated the immunoreactivity for catalase.
Conclusions
Results  may  suggest  that  increased  expression  of  catalase  in  Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis is implicated in the pathogenesis of this disorder. Nevertheless, the role
of catalase in inflammation of thyroid is still not completely known and further
studies in this matter should be continued.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1033
EP1034
Abnormal thyroid function tests following thyroidectomy
A. Serap Yalin1, Erdem Turemen1, Mithat Biyikli1, Ayhan Erdemir2,
Inci Kucukercan3 & Metin Cakmakci2
1Anadolu Medical Center, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Istanbul, Turkey;2Anadolu Medical Center, Department of General
Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey;3Anadolu Medical Center, Department of
Biochemistry, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction
Permanent hypothyroidism is a common side effect of thyroidectomy. Thyroxine
binding  globulin
(TBG)  deficiency  is  characterized  with  low  total  thyroid
hormones (TH) in the presence of normal free THs and thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH).
Case report
A previously  healthy
37-year-old  man  underwent  annual  health  check-up.
Thyroid US revealed a 24!14!19 mm isoechoic solid nodule in the left lobe.
TSH was 1.4 (0.27-4.2 mIU/ml). Fine needle aspiration (FNA) revealed Bethesda
Category IV (follicular neoplasm or suspicious for follicular neoplasm) and
thyroidectomy was recommended. He admitted to endocrinology outpatient clinic
(EOC) for preoperative assessment. Thyroid antibodies, calcitonin, parathyroid
hormone, calcium and phosphorus were normal. Left lobectomy was performed.
Surgical pathology revealed a follicular adenoma. General surgery outpatient
clinic referred patient to EOC 1.5 months later with low total TH levels (TSH:
2.12, total triiodothyronine (TT3): 0.41 (0.8-2 ng/ml), total thyroxine (TT4): 3.41
(5.1-14.10 mg/dl)). Laboratory tests were repeated: TSH: 1.9, free T4: 1.57 (0.93-
1.7 ng/dl), free T3: 2.29 (1.8-4.6 pg/ml) were normal while TT3: 0.35 and TT4:
2.81 were low. Low total THs in the presence of normal TSH and free THs
suggested TBG deficiency (TBGD). TBG was 3.54 (14-31 mg/ml). In the absence
of secondary disorders (malnutrition, liver or renal disease, drugs) causing low
TBG levels were, he was diagnosed as having inherited TBGD (iTBGD). He was
informed about iTBGD but he declined any genetic analysis.
Conclusions
TBGD is a nonharmful condition that is either acquired (aTBGD) due to lack of
protein supply or synthesis, loss of urinary protein or X linked inherited TBGD
(iTBGD). Complications are those stemming from the primary disorders and
erroneously administered L-thyroxine treatment. In complete iTBGD males have
no detectable TBG while in partial iTBGD, males have some measurable TBG.
Evaluation of thyroid function only with total THs may lead to a misdiagnosis of
hypothyroidism and unnecessary treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1034
EP1035
Propylthiouracil induced ANCA-associated vasculitis
Pedro Souteiro1, Joana Freitas2, Susana Amaral3, Sandra Belo1,
Claudia Nogueira4, Rodrigues Pereira5 & Ivone Meirinho6
1Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro Hospi-
talar São João, Porto, Portugal;2Department of Medical Oncology, Instituto
Português de Oncologia do Porto, Porto, Portugal;3Department of Medical
Oncology, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal;4Department of Endocrinology, Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-
Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal;5Department of Pathology,
Centro Hospitalar São Joa˜o, Porto, Portugal;6Department of Internal
Medicine, Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Propylthiouracil  is  a  drug  used  in  the  treatment  of  hyperthyroidism  and
autoimmunity phenomena have been described as a side effect of its use. Despite
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (anca) positivity is frequent in patients
treated with propylthiouracil, the occurrence of clinically evident vasculitis is
rare.
Case report
A 65-year-old woman, diagnosed with hyperthyroidism 2 years ago and treated
with propylthiouracil (50C50 mg) since then. She presented to the emergency
department with dyspnoea, pleuritic chest pain and hemoptoic cough in the last
2 days. Physical examination showed a peripheral oxygen saturation of 82% and
rales in the lower thirds of both lungs. Laboratorial study revealed hypoxia (po2
44.8 mmhg), falling haemoglobin levels (14.0 to 10.1 g/dl in one month), an
elevated c-reactive protein (173.3 mg/dl; reference values [rv]:!3 mg/dl) and
significant erythrocyturia (6423.5/ul). The chest x-ray showed bilateral infiltrates
on the lower pulmonary lobes. She was admitted to the medicine department with
the diagnosis of pulmonary-renal vasculitic disorder. Facing the diagnosis of a
probable pulmonary-renal vasculitic disorder, she was hospitalized. The patient
performed  a  thoracic  ct  scan
(“ground-glass  pattern  that  suggested  diffuse
alveolar haemorrhage”) and autoimmune (ancas-mpoO200 u/ml) and thyroid
(tsh
0.24 uui/ml; rv:
0.35-4.94; t4 l
0.7 ng/dl; rv:
0.7-1.48; negative trabs;
positive anti-tpo antibodies) laboratory studies. A progressive raise of plasmatic
creatinine motivated a kidney biopsy that revealed histopathological features of
vasculitis.  Propylthiouracil  treatment  was  stopped  and  the  patient  received
metilprednisolone  and  cyclophosphamide  pulses  with  respiratory,  renal  and
hematologic improvement. She was discharged from the hospital and now she is
on remission under prednisolone and azathioprine and euthyroid without specific
therapy.
Conclusions
Propylthiouracil  induced  anca-associated  vasculitis  is  characterized  by  the
positivity for anca of the mpo subtype and by a low recurrence rate when
compared with primary vasculitis. This case report raises awareness about the
possible systemic side effects of antithyroid agents.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1035
EP1036
An inverse relationship between weight and free thyroxine middle
gestation
Mariana Costache Outas1,2, Camelia Procopiuc3, Cosmina Costache4 &
Simona Fica1,5
1Department of Endocrinology “Carol Davila” University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;2Endocrinology Outpatient Clinic,
“Coltea” Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;3Department of Pediatric
Endocrinology, “C.I. Parhon” National Institute of Endocrinology,
Bucharest, Romania;4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Clinical
Hospital Dr. Ioan Cantacuzino, Bucharest, Romania;5Department of
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, “Elias” University
Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
Evaluation of the thyroid function in pregnant women is of extreme importance
for maternal and neonatal health. The reference interval of thyroid function tests
in pregnant women differs from that of the general population and among
trimesters in the same patient. Trimester-specific thyrotropin (TSH) reference
ranges for pregnant women are recommended in order to avoid misclassification
of the thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy.
Less data about the free thyroxin (FT4) trimester-specific reference range is
available.
In order to test the variability of free thyroxin we performed a prospective pilot
study.
41 consecutive pregnant women with abnormal thyroid function tests were
selected  for  this  study.  There  were  excluded  the  patients  with  known
hypothyroidism before pregnancy (3), the patients diagnosed with Basedow
disease (5) and the patients in the third trimester of pregnancy because of the low
number of cases (4).
We stratified the women in two groups according to TSH values as having normal
thyroid function or subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH). Non parametric tests
revealed no significant differences for free thyroxine between the two groups
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
when analyzed by trimester of pregnancy or as a whole. We found a negative
correlation between free thyroxine and body weight in the 2nd trimester for the
SCH.
Different reports about the variability of free thyroxine along the pregnancy
should consider the body weight of the patient along with iodine supply and the
laboratory methodology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1036
EP1037
Cytological evaluation of thyroid nodules by fine-needle aspiration
performed by endocrinologists. Our clinical experience in 2014.
Mariana Tomé Fernández-Ladreda1, Carmen Bautista1, Rocio Rojas2 &
Daniel Gonzalez Duarte1
1Endocrinology and Nutrition. Hospitalpunta de Europa, Algeciras (Cádiz),
Spain;2Internal Medicine. Hospital Punta de Europa, Algeciras (Cádiz),
Spain.
Introducción
Thyroid nodule is a very frequent pathology that affects 4-8% of population. Fine-
needle aspiration
(FNA) guided by ultrasound (US) is considered the gold
standard test in diagnostic evaluation of thyroid nodules. This technique is being
assumed more and more frequently by endocrinologists.
Description of Methods
We conducted a retrospective study that included all thyroid US-guided FNA
performed in 2014. We considered the following variables: age, nodule size,
cytological resul and histogical result after surgery.
Resultados
227 thyroid nodule FNA were performed in 185 patients (85% female, mean age
56.09G14.44 years). Mean nodule size was 25.9G8 mm (n:221, lost 6). We
obtained  the  following  cytological  results:
48.9%  benign;
11%  Follicular
neoplasm; 3.1% suspicious for malignancy; 0.9% malignant, 35.2% unsatisfac-
tory and other 0.9%. We repeated FNA in 48.9% of cases: 41.4% benign; 54.1%
unsatisfactory; 0.9% suspicious for malignancy, 0.9% folicular neoplasm and
0.9% other. (n:111, lost 2). 41 patients underwent total or partial thyroidectomy:
17% malignant (3 medullary carcinomas, 4 papillary carcinomas)
Conclusion
Thyroid nodule FNA is the technique of choice in evaluation of thyroid nodules
and assumption of this technique by endocrinologists is a reality today. The
incidence of malignance detected in our series is consistent with the literature,
however  the  number  of  unsatisfactory  results  is  above  the  international
recommendations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1037
EP1038
At least 15 mCi radioactive iodine dose should be considered in Graves’
disease with larger goiter: A sonographic volumetric study
Jungmin Kim2, Yunah Jeong1, Jee Hee Yoon1, Hee Kyung Kim1 &
Ho-Cheol Kang1
1
Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea;2Saint Carollo Hospital, Sunchun, Republic of Korea.
Background
Fixed-dose radioactive iodine therapy (RAI) is one of the standard therapy for
Graves’ disease (GD). However, optimal RAI dose to achieve hypothyroidism in
GD has been controversial.
Methods
The clinical outcome of 124 patients with GD treated with a RAI between Apr.
2004 and Dec. 2014 was analyzed retrospectively. Responder group was defined
as patients who were rendered hypothyroid by the RAI. Thyroid volume (TV) was
assessed with sonography using the ellipsoid formula.
Results
The median duration of GD was 3 years (0.1-18 y) and the mean TV was 40.7G
25.8 g. Seventy five patients (60.5%) had single RAI. Fifty-four patients (43.5%)
became hypothyroid after first RAI, and additional 31 patients needed 2 to 4 times
of RAI to achieve hypothyroidism. In 54 patients who became hypothyroid after
first RAI, the TV was significantly lower, compared with non-responder group
(25.1G8.8 vs. 52.8G28.2, P!0.001). When divided into low dose responder
group (!15 mCi, nZ46) and high dose responder group (R15 mCi, nZ39)
based on total accumulated RAI doses, there were no differences in age, sex,
disease duration and levels of TBII, but TV was significantly lower in patients
treated with low dose RAI. The cut-off of thyroid volume for low dose responder
group was 32.7 g (sensitivity 80.9% and specificity 76.7%).
Conclusions
Thyroid volume had a significant effect on the outcome of RAI in GD patients.
The optimal fixed RAI dose for GD patients with larger goiter (R33 g) should be
at least 15 mCi to simplify the therapy and achieve the best outcome in iodine-
replete Korea.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1038
EP1039
Comparison of thyroid nodule prevalence in two population-based
studies in Bulgaria: 2006 and 2012
Alexander Shinkov, Anna-Maria Borissova, Roussanka Kovatcheva,
Lilia Dakovska, Jordan Vlahov & Mirtcho Vukov
Medical University of Sofia, University Hospital of Endocrinology,
Sofia, Bulgaria.
The nodular goiter is the most prevalent thyroid disorder. Its prevalence increases
with age and reaches over 70%. The aim of the study was to compare the nodule
prevalence in two population-based studies, carried in Bulgaria in 2006 and 2012.
Material and methods
Two thousand four hundred and two subjects (1347 female and 1053 male, age
range 20-94 years) were included in 2006 and 2022 (1073 female and 949 male,
20-88 years) in 2012. All subjects filled an interview and underwent thyroid
ultrasound. Body weight, height and TSH and TPO Ab were measured. Nodules 5
mm or more were registered and their number - single or multiple and the echo
structure - solid, cystic or mixed were recorded.
Results
Nodules were found in 23.4% of the subjects, in 30.1% of the females and 15.0%
of the males, P!0.001 in 2006 and in 24.4%, 32.1% of the females and 15.7% of
the males (P!0.001) in 2012. No significant difference was found between the
two studies. In both studies the nodule prevalence increased with age (females:
from 16% in the age group 20-29 to 45% in the over 70, 2006 and from 8% to
52%, 2012; males: from 6% to 29%, 2006 and from 6% to 27%, 2012). In both
studies hyperthyroidism was significantly higher in the subjects with nodules,
than in those without.
Conclusion
In both studies the thyroid nodule prevalence was similar to the figures cited for
other European countries. No differences were observed between the two studies.
It might be inferred that the interval between them is too small to demonstrate a
change in the population nodule prevalence.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1039
EP1040
Prevalence of autoimmune thyroid disorders in kin/relatives with those
diseases
Mara Carsote1, Mihaela Ratcu2, Payman Gharibafshar2, Bogdan Oprisan2,
Dana Cristina Staicu2 & Dan Peretianu2
1Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2Medical Center
“Povernei”, Bucharest, Romania.
Abstract
Aim and objectives
To investigate the prevalence of relationships between kin/relatives with a known
thyroid immune disorder related to Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Material and method
1. Thyroid disease diagnosis: a. ATPO O 34 u/ml Z Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT);
b. ATPO Z normal but with high antithyroglobuline (ATG) Z thyroiditis with
only hyper-ATG (T-ATG); c. hypothyroidism without high ATPO/ATG Z
idiopathic mixedema (IM).
2. Searching for a relationships between kins (including anamnesis).
Results
There  were  registered
1401  pt  with  HT,  129  T-ATG,  and  108  Idiopathic
myxedema. A specific kin/relationship could be identified in 189 patients. The
distribution was tabulated.
1. Mother-Daughter: Pairs: 74, 6, 5; Total: 86.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
2. Mother-Son: Pairs: 12, 1, 0; TotalZ16;
3. Father-Daughter: Pairs: 8, 0, 0; TotalZ8
4. Father-Son: Pairs: 3, 0, 0. TotalZ3.
5. Grandmother-Grandson/daughter: PairsZ1, 0, 0; TotalZ1.
6. Uncle/Aunt-Nephew: Pairs: 4, 1, 0; TotalZ5.
7. Wife-Husband: Pairs: 4, 0, 1. TotalZ5.
8. Sister-Sister: Pairs: 19, 2, 3. TotalZ24.
9. Sister-Brother: Pairs: 5, 0, 0. TotalZ5
10. Total pairs: 130, 10, 9.
11. Multiple members: 5, 0, 0.
12. Patients: 197, 16, 17. Percent: 11.28, for HT; 12.4, for TATG; 15.74 for
Idiopathic Myxedema.
The presence of a relationship between kin could be registered in 11.28% from
patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis, in 12.4% from those with only T-ATG and
15.74% from those with idiopathic myxedema.
Conclusion
Therefore, the penetration of a relationship between two kin with Hashimoto
thyroiditis and related disorders could be registered in over 13% patients (more
exactly, 13.17%).
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1040
EP1041
Drug-induced hepatitis in a patient with Graves’ disease
Seifeldin Yahia & Nicola Sommers
Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board-Ysbyty Gwynedd-Bangor,
Gwynedd-Bangor, UK.
A 52 year old lady presented with a history of weight loss, tachycardia and tremor.
She was diagnosed with primary hyperthyroidism; TFTs were TSH !0.02 mU/l
and FT4 O100 pmol/l, LFTs were mildly deranged (ALT 79 u/l, ALP 101 u/l).
TSH receptor antibodies were positive, suggestive of Graves’ disease.
The patient was started on carbimazole, initially at 10 mg TDS which was titrated
down to 5 mg TDS. Repeat LFT showed ALP at 219 u/l and a fluctuating ALT
between 58 u/l and 141 u/l over the first 5 months on carbimazole.
Repeat LFT during a routine clinic appointment showed grossly deranged LFTs,
with ALT of 1001 u/l and ALP of 306 u/l. Carbimazole was stopped immediately.
Full  hepatic  screen  was  unrewarding  a  part  from  positive  smooth  muscle
autoantibodies. This could suggest a diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis, which is
associated with Graves’ disease, but given that ALT was O30! normal, whilst
ALP was only 2! normal, this picture is more in keeping with acute hepatitis
secondary to carbimazole.
Only one week after stopping carbimazole the patient rapidly became thyrotoxic,
with FT4 of 60.7 pmol/l and FT3 of 30.5 pmol/l. She was started on lithium and
lugol’s  iodine  in  order  to  normalize  TFTs  prior  to  thyroidectomy.  LFTs
normalized over a period of 4 weeks after stopping carbimazole.
The patient underwent total thyroidectomy; histology showed diffuse hyperplasia.
Post-operatively  she  had  right  vocal  cord  paralysis  but  this  has  resolved
spontaneously. The patient is now on replacement thyroxine.
Conclusion
Hepatotoxicity is rare but serious side-effect of carbimazole. It is important to
consider all causes of hepatitis. Where there is concern about the cause of
hepatitis, surgery may be preferable when compared to changing to another anti-
thyroid drug.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1041
EP1042
A case of concurrent Riedel’s disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Ibtissem Oueslati, Karima Khiari, Emna Elfeleh, Nadia Mchirgui,
Najla Bchir & Néjib Ben Abdallah
Department of Endocrinology-Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction
Riedel thyroiditis is a rare form of infiltrative and fibrotic disease of the thyroid
which may involve neighbouring tissues. The main differential diagnosis of
Riedel  thyroiditis  includes  malignant  tumors  and  fibrosing  Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis.
Herein,  we  report  a  case  of  concurrent  Riedel’s  disease  and  Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Observation
A 45-year-old woman was diagnosed with goiter and hypothyroidism. She was
treated with Levothyroxine. Two months later, the patient presented with a
rapidly growing goiter associated with dysphagia for solids and dyspnoea.
Physical examination revealed a hypothyroid state, a large and hard goiter.
Thyroid functions tests showed a TSH of 59.07 mIU/ml and a FT4 of 0.83 ng/dl.
The antibody tests were performed, revealing positive thyroperoxidase antibodies
of 386.8 IU/ml (NR: !35 ui/ml) and thyroglobulin antibodies O5000 IU/ml
(NR: !225 IU/ml).
Cervical ultrasonography revealed an enlarged heterogeneous thyroid gland (right
lobe: 66 ! 37.5 ! 32.5 mm, left lobe: 61 ! 42 ! 38 mm) with no evidence of
nodular  lesions.  Ct-scan  revealed  a  hypodense  thyroid  gland  hypertrophy
extending to adjacent tissues.
The Levothyroxine dose was increased and the patient was referred for total
thyroidectomy.
However,  thyroidectomy  couldn’t  be  performed  due  to  hard  adhesion  to
neighboring structures. Analysis of surgical biopsy section revealed fragments
of fibrous tissue with diffuse inflammatory infiltrate composed of lymphocytes,
plasma cells and eosinophils. Fibrosis and inflammation infiltrated muscle and
adipose tissues around the thyroid gland. There were no evidences of malignancy.
Considering the clinical course and histopathological findings, the diagnosis of
Riedel’s goiter with coexistent Hashimoto’s thyroiditis was established.
High dose of corticosteroids was successfully used in our patient.
Conclusion
It’s  difficult  to  differentiate  between  Riedel’s  thyroiditis  and  fibrosing
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. However the coexisting of both diseases has been
reported in few cases and seems to be coincidental.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1042
EP1043
Ophthalmopathy occurrence after two years of thyroidectomy on
account of papillary thyroid microcarcinoma
Mustafa Altay, Mehmet C¸ olbay & Metin Arslan
Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
Thyroid ophthalmopathy occurs generally due to Graves’ disease. Only a few
cases were reported about ophthalmopathy in the years following a thyroidectomy
and RAI therapy or metastatic papillary thyroid cancer.
Case
A forty-six-year-old female patient was operated on for the fine needle aspiration
biopsy
(FNAB)  result  of  a  suspicious  follicular  neoplasia.  A  pathology
examination showed a papillary microcarcinoma and Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Her serum thyroglobulin level was ! 0.2 ng/ml with the 175 mcg/day l-thyroxin
replacement. At 24 months postoperatively, she had noticed prominence of her
eyes, especially the left. The patient was given an eye examination which
revealed bilateral exophthalmus, the patient had a bilateral eyelid retraction.
Measurements by Hertel exophthalmometry were 20 mm in the right eye and 22
mm in the left. Her Clinical Activity Score was 2. Orbital CT scans showed a
bilateral enlargement of the inferior, medial and superior rectus at the upper limit
of normal and did not exceed 5 mm in thickness. Both of the central parts of the
bulbus oculi muscles were located in the anterior of the interzygomatic line
(exophthalmus). Her TSH receptor antibody was 9.46 U/l (in the normal range
(0-14 U/l)), anti-TPO and anti-Tg antibodies were high as in the preoperative
period (304.5/ml and 134.4 U/ml, respectively). Low levels of focal uptake by the
two foci of residual thyroid tissue was detected at the thyroid scintigraphy.
Levothyroxine dosage was adjusted according to the TSH values which should be
near 0.5 mIU/l. The patient’s eye symptoms resolved completely approximately 6
months after.
Discussion
It should be kept in mind that, during follow-up of thyroidectomised patients with
papillary thyroid cancer, ophthalmopathy may be developed, even if not given
radioiodine or negative for usual autoantibodies.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1043
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1044
Technique of story-telling in patients undergoing thyroid surgery
Sabaretnam Mayilvaganan, Gyan Chand, Saroj Mishra, Amit Agarwal,
Gaurav Agarwal, Anjali mishra, AK Verma & Dabeer Warsi
Sanjay Gandhi Post graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India.
Introduction
In the modern day busy clinical practice the communication between patient and
care giver is at minimal level. The patients feel apprehensive when advised about
the surgical intervention. In such situation they feel the need of detail information
from the care givers.Story telling is a tool which can be used for this problem. We
intended to study the efficacy of storytelling technique on patients undergoing
Hemithyroidectomy for benign cytology.
Materials & methods
A story of a lady (cartoon version) aged 25 years with a benign thyroid nodule
who  underwent  uneventful  Hemithyroidectomy  is  depicted  in  this  movie
including the history, clinical examination, investigations, counselling and the
operative procedure and the running time of the animation movie is four minutes.
For developing this movie, high end graphic computer work station and various
multimedia authoring tools were used. The story was shown to patients with
clinically solitary thyroid nodules who were provisional candidates for surgery in
the outpatient department.The patients filled in the evaluation of Multimedia
animation questionnaire at the time of discharge.
Results
20 patients filled the questionnaire. 19 found the movie useful and their remaining
questionnaire was analyzed. Mean age was 35.45G12.8 years. 15 (75%) were
females. All patients were euthyroid. The mean weight was 40.80G20.79 gms.
The final histopathology was colloid in majority. In the questionnaire, the mean
score for improved understanding of the disease was 73.9G14.7 (PZ0.003),
better organization of treatment was 78.6G13.1 (PZ0.000), stimulated interest in
the  relatives  was
70.8G15.8
and  saved  unnecessary  discussion  with  the
consultant was 55.5G7.8.
Conclusion
Story  telling  is  a  useful  tool  in  health  communication.  With  widespread
availability of high speed internet and affordable mobile computing devices
such kind of information can be of use to the patients in decision making.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1044
EP1045
Hypothyroidism: a reversible cause of heart failure
Nisarg Shah & Stasia Miaskiewicz
Allegheny General Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Introduction
Hypothyroidism is characterized by a decrease in oxygen and substrate utilization
by major organ systems of the body. Hence patients with angina have fewer
symptoms if they become hypothyroid. Hypothyroidism also results in brady-
cardia and weakening of myocardial contraction. Cardiac preload is decreased,
afterload is increased, and chronotropic and inotropic functions are reduced.
The impairment of these measures leads to a reduction in cardiac output.
Case Report
A 69-year-old male presents after a syncope. The patient reported no history of
angina, syncope or seizure disorder except recent onset fatigue and dyspnea on
exertion. He also complained of recent hair loss, hoarse voice and scrotal swelling.
The patient had no thyromegaly but had non-pitting pedal edema. Initial results
showed, TSH of 122.1 mcU/ml, free T4 of !0.02 ng/dl, total T3 of 22 ng/dl.
Thyroglobulin and thyroid microsomal antibodies were positive. His mental status
was intact and showed no features of myxedema coma. He was started on a lower
dose of levothyroxine (LT4) to prevent an arrhythmia. Patient had a transthoracic
ECHO that showed severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction with an ejection
fraction (EF) of 25% and global hypokinesis. Left heart catheterization showed
triple  vessel  disease  without  complete  occlusion.  However,  from  the  left
ventriculogram, the EF improved to 60% after 3 days of LT4. The free T4
increased to 0.2 ng/dl. Eventually the patient had a coronary artery bypass grafting
(CABG) where intraoperatively, the EF remained stable at 50%.
Conclusion
Our case describes a patient who was profoundly hypothyroid, yet had no features
of myxedema coma and showed dramatic improvement after initiating LT4. The
improvement  in  cardiac  contractility  prior  to  the  CABG  demonstrates  the
relationship between hypothyroidism and left ventricular dysfunction, and its
reversible nature with restoration of thyroid function. Simultaneously, appropriate
LT4 dose initiation is important to prevent arrhythmias.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1045
EP1046
Exophthalmos as the first manifestation of mantle cell lymphoma of the
patient with Hashimoto thyroiditis
Krzysztof Marczewski1,3, Dorota Boniek-Poprawa1,2, Piotr Tomaszewski4,
Agnieszka Kawałko1 & Marek Maciejewski1,2
1Department of Nephrology, Endocrinology, Hypertension and Internal
Disease Voivodeship Hospital of Pope John Paul II, Zamosc, Poland;
2University of Management and Administration, Zamosc, Poland;3The
Faculty of Medicine Lublin University of Economy and Innovation, Lublin,
Poland;4Department of Radiology Voivodeship Hospital of Pope
John Paul II, Zamosc, Poland.
Introduction
The diagnosis of thyroid orbitopathy is based on clinical symptoms and typical
changes in laboratory tests confirming thyroid disease. In approximately 5% it is
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Typical treatment is primarily steroids administered
intravenously. But one disease does not exempts the other, and the drugs can not
read. Therefore, we would like to present the history of our patient.
Case report
55 year-old man was admitted to the Endocrinology Ward due to a suspected
thyroid orbitopathy, with the intention of steroid pulse therapy. The patient for a
few weeks remained swollen eyelids, watery eyes, protrusion of eyeballs.
On physical examination, otherwise no significant deviations from the norm.
They showed normal levels of TSH, FT3 and FT4, and TR AB, and AB TPO
exceed the norm of 25.3 (N 0-9 IU/ml), with of other tests drew our attention to a
small lymphocytosis (5, G/l).
MRI of the orbits revealed on both sides surrounded eyeballs confluent, well
demarcated areas undergoing moderate hypo-intensive strengthening mainly in
the area of mine-medial orbital segments. The muscles of the correct size. The
eyeballs symmetrical correct size and shape, moved slightly forward. That are
likely infiltration of the type of lymphoma, inflammatory changes less likely. The
ultrasound said enlarged lymph nodes in the neck bilaterally largest 20!10 mm
on the right side, left side 19!8 mm, near the axillary node on the right size
25!14 mm, on the left the size of 26!12 mm.
The patient was taken right axillary node for pathology, which was a mantle cell
lymphoma classical type. The patient was referred for further treatment to the
Clinic of Hematology.
Comment
If in our patient’s treatment was based on clinical features of orbitopathy, then
most likely it would lead to a initial clinical improvement because lymphoma
respond to treatment with corticosteroids. However, this delay proper diagnosis
and treatment, and probably was detrimental to the patient.
Despite some similarities in histology this is the first case known to us coexistence
of mantle cell lymphoma and Hashimoto thyroiditis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1046
EP1047
Rhabdomyolysis case based on hypothyroidism
Ihsan Ates
Ankara Numune Training and Research Hospital, Department of Internal
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Muscle involvement in hypothyroidism is a rare complication. These patients are
often present with decreased muscle mass, cramps and myalgia. With these
clinical symptoms increasing muscle enzyme suggests the rhabdomyolysis table.
Rhabdomyolysis based on hypothyroidism is not a common condition. In this
report, a case which detected rhabdomyolysis based on deep hypothyroidism will
be discussed.
Seventy-two years old male patient applied to our clinic with the complaints of
increasingly widespread muscle pain, muscle weakness and leg cramps. The
patient who had total thyroidectomy based on multinodular goiter did not proceed
using levothyroxine after surgery. There was no known drug, alcohol or smoking
history.  The  patient’s  vital  signs  during  the  application;  body  temperature
37.38C, pulse 55/min, blood pressure 130/95 mm Hg, respiratory rate 13/min. On
physical examination, cardiac and respiratory were normal, dry skin, decreased
turgor tone, bilateral lower ekstremitre trace edama and palpation tenderness in
the legs were available. In examined laboratory findings; urea:50 mg/dl (17-43),
creatinine:1.8 mg/dl (0.5 to 1.2), calcium:6.6 mg/dl, phosphorus:5.2 mg/dl, uric
acid:6.9 mg/dl, AST:94 IU/l (10-50), LDH:796 U/l (240-480), CK total:4370 U/l
(!190), troponin I:0.021 ng/ml (0 to 0.15), CK-MB:8 U/l (7-25). TSH O
100 mIU/ml
(0.34
to
5.6),  free  thyroxine!0.15
ng/dl
(0.61
to
1.12),  free
triiodothyronine:1.04 pg/ml. 0.6 mcg/kg of levothyroxine treatment was started
considiring that the patient has rhabdomyolysis based on deep hypothyroidism.
Creatinine and CK returned completely back to normal range at the end of three
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
weeks levothyroxine treatment. Rhabdomyolysis myoglobin is characterized by
muscle cells element escaping into the circulation which include electrolyte and
sarcoplasmic proteins. Rhabdomyolysis also known as injuries, crush syndrome,
may also present rare with hypothyroidism while it is a situation usually seen after
major trauma. Rhabdomyolysis based on deep hypothyroidism, developed in this
patient who did not proceed using levothyroxine after total thyroidectomy in this
case report.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1047
EP1048
The relationship between thyroid function and type 1 diabetes Mellitus
duration
Cristina Rizov & Lorina Vudu
State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Nicolae Testemitanu”,
Chisinau, Republic of Moldova.
Thyroid disease is common among the population, and the prevalence increases
with age. In patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) the risk of thyroid
dysfunction and thyroid autoimmunity is increased. The aim of this study was to
investigate the relationship between thyroid function and T1DM duration. There
were evaluated 110 patients (71 women and 39 men) with T1DM between 2013
and 2015 and were appreciated antibodies against thyroid peroxidase (ATPO)
(normal  values  range !34 UI/ml)  and thyroid-stimulating  hormone (TSH)
(normal values range 0.17 - 4.05 mIU/l). From 110 patients, 15 (13.6%) patients
were excluded because of treated clinical hypothyroidism, the other 95 patients
were  divided  into
3 groups  depending  on  the  T1DM  duration:
1st  group
(!5 years); 2nd group (5-10 years); 3rd group (O10 years).
Results
The 1st group included 18 (18.9%) patients with average TSH 1.438G0.79 (0.6 -
2.9 mIU/l) and ATPO 20.2G8.8 (9.8 - 36 UI/ml). The 2nd group was made by 32
(33.7%) patients with TSH 1.2G0.2 (0.4 - 3.4 mIU/l) and ATPO 19.1G4.6
(5-47 UI/ml). In the 3rd group were 45 (47.4%) patients with TSH 2.1G0.3
(0.5-5.9 mIU/l) and ATPO 85.1G34.7 (5 - 600 UI/ml). In this group 10 (22.2%)
patients had subclinical hypothyroidism without any clinical signs. Statistically
significant  correlation  was  found  between  TSH  level  and  T1DM  duration
(rZ0.404; P!0.01).
Conclusions
Thyroid  pathology  in  T1DM  is  often  overlooked  due  to  lack  of  clinical
manifestations, which underscores screening importance. In the study were
observed a correlation between TSH level and T1DM duration. So, with the
increase  T1DM  duration  the  number  of  patients  with  autoimmune  thyroid
pathology is increasing especially subclinical hypothyroidism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1048
EP1049
Surgical treatment Graves disease: long term results and their
predictions
Igor Makarov, Rudolf Galkin, Aleksandr Sidorov & Victor Shibanov
Samara State Medical University, Samara, Russia.
The incidence of Graves disease in different regions of Russia ranges from 20 to
50 cases per 100000 population.
Purpose
To improve the results of surgical treatment of patients with Graves disease by
identifying the optimum amount of remaining thyroid tissue and prediction of
thyroidal status in the long term.
Methods and design
The 138 patients with Graves disease operated over the past 10 years: 131 women
(94.9%) and 7 men (5.1%). The operations performed on classic method - subtotal
subfascial resection thyroid by O.V.Nikolaev (1951).
Results
Euthyroid status was detected in 68 (49.2%) patients. The signs of subclinical
hypothyroidism found at 30 (21.7%) patients. The 25 patients (18.2%) have
postoperative hypothyroidism; 15 patients (10.9%) have recurrence of hyperthyr-
oidism. The main cause of relapse of hyperthyroidism was saving on operation the
part of thyroid more than 8-19 g.
Conclusion
The study allowed to select prognostic criteria, bearing in mind that it is possible
to achieve euthyroid condition.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
1. Volume of leaving thyroid tissue for patients older than 40 years must be 6 g,
but for the patients younger 40 years - no more 4 g.
2. The duration of conservative antithyroidal therapy should not exceed 1 year.
Recurrence of the Graves disease after abolition of antithyroid drugs is the
indication for surgical treatment
3. The high level of thyroid antibody (Thyroid Peroxidase AntibodyR600 IU/ml
and/or Antithyroglobulin Antibody R 300 IU/ml) is the main if thyroid tissue is
smaller that 4 g.
4. Thyroid tissue with volume less than 2 gramm no able to meet the physiological
needs of man in thyroid hormones
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1049
EP1050
Relation between Serum 25-hydroxy-vitamin D Levels and TSH
receptor antibody seropositivity
Fatma Saglam, Derya Koseoglu, Dilek Berker & Serdar Guler
Numune Research and Training Hospital, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey.
Objective
Vitamin D is an immune-modulator that may play a role in thyroid related
autoimmunity. But the relation between Vitamin D and Graves’ disease (GD) is
not well defined yet. The aim of this study was to investigate the association of
25-hydroxy-vitamin D (25[OH]D) levels and TSH receptor antibody (TRab)
levels in GD.
Design
A total of 429 GD patients were analyzed retrospectively. 122 of 429 patients had
vitamin D levels were enrolled in this study. The levels of 25(OH)D and TRAb
were examined. Vitamin D deficiency was defined as a 25(OH)D below 20 ng/ml
and insufficiency as a 25(OH) D of 20-29 ng/ml. Normal range was accepted as
30 ng/ml and above. TRAb negativity was defined as 0-13 U/l and positivity was
defined as 14 U/l and above.
Results
Among 122 patients mean age was 42.9G14 years. TRAb seropositivy was found
in 69.7% (nZ85). TRAb titres’ median was 16 U/l (minimum: 0- maximum: 295
U/l). Vitamin D deficiency was detected in 83.6% (102/122) of the patients.
Vitamin D insufficiency was found in 11.5% (14/122) of the patients. Normal
vitamin D levels were found in 4.9% (6/122) of the patients. Vitamin D deficiency
was  higher  in  TRAb-positive  GD  patients  than  TRAb-negative  patients
(respectively 75.5% (77/102) vs 24.5% (25/102) beside according to vitamin D
insuffiency there was no difference between TRAb-positive and negative GD
patients. There was also found a significant negative correlation between TRAb
titres and vitamin D levels.
Conclusion
Low vitamin D status is associated with increased TRAb seropositivity in GD.
Further research is necessary to fully elucidate the importance of vitamin D in the
case of GD.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1050
EP1051
Long-term follow-up results of benign nodular goiter in a rural district
of east Japan
Takao Kunori, Noriko Nemoto, Shinya Kawaguchi & Fumiaki Shinya
Iwaki-kyoritsu Hospital, Iwaki-shi, Fukushima-ken, Japan.
Introduction
Surgery for benign nodular goiter (NOD) is currently limited to cancer or
cosmetic deformities. Most patients are, in principle, followed up for years or
decades. The long-term outcome, however, is not always clear.
Patients and methods
NOD was diagnosed as benign in 1,825 patients (1990-2015). 102 patients (5%)
were treated by surgery. 95% returned to home doctors (69%) or continued to visit
our clinic (518 patients, 31%). Follow-up examination (median 656 days; longest
22 years) was performed  by ultrasonography (US), measurement  of serum
thyroglobulin (Tg), or, if necessary, fine needle aspiration cytology (FNA).
Results
Cytological diagnosis: Follow-up FNA was performed once (61%), twice (22%),
thrice
(8%). Most patients (69%) received the second FNA within 3 years.
Morphological changes in solitary nodules: 1) VOL of solitary nodules (nZ531)
increased over 120% of initial VOL in 32% of patients, whereas it decreased to
less than 80% in 32% of patients. 2) Cystic changes were later observed in 10% of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
solid nodules (nZ89) and formed cysts in 74 patients (7%). Tg levels: Tg levels
remained stable during 5 years (nZ100). The level, however, tended to increase
after 10 years of follow-up period (nZ35). Clinical outcome: 4 patients (0.7%)
underwent surgery within 6 years due to cosmetic reasons (2 cases) or rapid
enlargement (2 cases). Papillary carcinoma in a cyst was diagnosed in one patient
after 3 times of FNA. Anaplastic carcinoma developed immediately after surgery
in one patient (5 years of follow-up).
Conclusions
Benign NOD was safe for life. A third of nodules shrank and a tenth formed cysts.
Late  surgery,  although  rare,  may  have  a  risk  to  induce  an  anaplastic
transformation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1051
EP1052
Long-term universal salt iodization has resulted now in more than
adequate iodine intake and consequent chronic autoimmune thyroiditis
in school-age children living in some localities from Mures and
Harghita Counties, Romania
Zsuzsanna Szántó1,2, Zsuzsánna Réti1,3, Anna Gáll4, Iolanda Ballók5,
Attila Csiszér6, Elo˝d Nagy7, Zsuzsanna Croitorescu8, Anna Dávid9,10,
Margit Hadnagy11, Emo˝ke Barbara László11, Hella Zier11, Zsuzsa Tankó2,
Zsuzsanna Gál11 & Imre Zoltán Kun2,10
1Department of Endocrinology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Tîrgu Mures, Romania;2Clinical Department of Endocrinology, Clinical
Hospital Mures County, Tîrgu Mures, Romania;3Topmed” Medical Center,
Tîrgu Mures, Romania;4School Dispensary, Miercurea Ciuc, Harghita
County, Romania;5General Practitioner, Unit Glajarie, Mures County,
Romania;6Regional Center of Public Health, National Institute of Public
Health, Tîrgu Mures, Romania;7Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Pharmacy, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tirgu Mures, Romania;
8Central Laboratory of Clinical Hospital Mures County, Tîrgu Mures,
Romania;9Clinical Department of Dermatology, Clinical Hospital Mures
County, Tîrgu Mures, Romania;10Doctoral School of University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Tîrgu Mures, Romania;11University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Tîrgu Mures, Romania.
Introduction
In Romania universal salt iodization was implemented into practice since 2002,
and iodine content of salt was gradually increased afterward. The efficiency and
sustainability of this nationwide program were evaluated among school children
from endemic regions of Mures and Harghita Counties. During these studies
thyroid  ultrasound  characteristic  for  chronic  autoimmune  thyroiditis  was
observed in a considerable number of cases.
Objective
To estimate the iodine status in schoolchildren living in some localities of the two
counties, and to detect cases with chronic autoimmune thyroiditis.
Material and methods
In
374
schoolchildren  with  age  between
6
to
14
years  physical  exam,
anthropometric evaluation, thyroid ultrasound, morning urinary iodine concen-
tration
(UIC), and in case of suggestive ultrasound appearance for thyroid
autoimmunity the level of serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), free-
thyroxine (fT4) and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPO-Ab) were assessed.
Results
Mean and median UIC were 342G197 mg/l and 298 mg/l, respectively, in Mures
County during 2013-2014, as well as 248G127 mg/l and 215 mg/l in Harghita
County during 2014-2015. Moreover 41.4% of children from Mures County and
38.4% from Harghita County had high UIC. The frequency of goiter was 4.7% in
the whole cohort. We observed hypoechoic and/or inhomogeneous thyroid on
ultrasound in 17.7%, from which in 9 children chronic autoimmune thyroiditis,
and subsequent subclinical or overt hypothyroidism was demonstrated.
Conclusion
The universal salt iodization program has eliminated iodine deficiency in the
investigated endemic regions from Mures and Harghita Counties, but it seems that
the iodine intake is more than adequate, even excessive by now. Harmful
consequences, such as chronic autoimmune thyroiditis might appear, as was seen
in our cohort. Consequent follow-up is needed to clarify the clinical course and
importance of cases with hypoechoic, inhomogeneous ultrasound picture of
thyroid, without TPO-Ab-positivity in schoolchildren with normal/high iodine
intake, living in former iodine-deficient regions.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1052
EP1053
Can routine steroid cover during radioiodine therapy of patients
with Graves’ disease (GD) prevent the onset of de novo Graves’
orbitopathy (GO)?
Aldona Kowalska1, Iwona Palyga1, Danuta Gasior-Perczak1,
Estera Mikina1, Monika Szymonek1, Monika Piwowar1, Klaudia Gadawska-
Juszczyk1, Tomasz Trybek1, Ryszard Mezyk1 & Stanislaw Gozdz2,3
1Endocrinology Department, Holycross Cancer Centre, Kielce, Poland;
2The Faculty of Health Sciences, Jan Kochanowski University, Kielce,
Poland;3Clinical Oncology Department, Holycross Cancer Centre, Kielce,
Poland.
Introduction
Radioiodine therapy is considered as a risk factor for the development of Graves’
orbitopathy (GO) de novo or worsening of pre-existing orbitopathy. This risk is
estimated in the available literature as up to 15-20%. Steroid cover is considered
to eliminated this risk.
Objective
The aim of our study was to established the relationship between the occurrence
of GO and treatment with radioiodine. And the analysis of the time of appearance
(onset) of OG after radioiodine treatment.
Material and methods
Between the years 2010-2015 in one centre, there were 152 patients treated with
moderate or severe GO. Either the coexistence of radioiodine therapy with the
onset of GO was analyzed, or the time (in months) of the onset of GO after I-131
therapy. The radioiodine therapy in all the patients (with or without prior GO) was
carried out under steroid cover with a fixed dose of 30 mg prednisone for a month,
with gradual weekly reduction’s of 5 mg every week for 10 weeks after treatment
with I-131.
Results
Fifty-two  patients
(representing
34%)  with  moderate  or  severe  GO  were
previously treated with radioiodine. De novo GO occurred in 49 patients, and 3
patients experienced a worsening of pre-existing OG. The mean time from
administration of 131 to onset of GO was 45.5 months (min 2 max 336 months),
and a median of 16.5 months.
Conclusions
1. The routine use of steroid cover does not prevent the development of GO.
2. This risk should be considered when planning treatment with radioiodine for
patients with Graves’ disease and the patient should be informed about this risk.
3. OG can occur even several years after treatment with I-131.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1053
EP1054
Prevalence of anti-thyroid antibodies (TAb) in relationship with high
TSH levels at different ages
Alessandra De Remigis1, Giammarco Tomei2, Franca Maria Lattanzio2,
Pierluigi De Remigis2, Umberto Occhiuzzi3 & Daniele Rapino1
1Azienda Ospedaliera Valtellina Valchiavenna, Sondrio, Italy;2Ospedale
Civile Chieti, Chieti, Italy;3Ospedale Civile, Avezzano, Italy.
Some authors observed lower thyroid antibodies titers (AbT) in children than in
the adult population. The aim of this work was to consider the prevalence of
positive results in AbT and elevated TSH levels. We have considered AbT and
TSH measurements in a large population. We divided samples in 7 age groups
0-18, 18-20, 20-40, 40-50, 50-60, 60-70 and O70 years old. Cut-off positivity
for AbTg and AbTPO was 50 and for TSH was 10 mUI/ml.
The concordance of altered AbT and TSH was calculated and expressed as
prevalence in the population. For both the tested antibodies and elevated TSH
(AbTg and AbTPO) a prevalence remarkably lower (0.4%) was observed in the
pediatric population (0-18 years old) compared to all the other age groups.
A linear increasing prevalence trend could be seen from pediatric population to the
older age group, altered TSH and positive AbTg reached prevalence of 1,0% in the
adulthood (40-50 years old) and a peak of 1.5% in the elderly (O70 years old).
Autoimmunity is correlated to different players, in particular in two orders of
factors  belonged  to  humoral  immunity  on  one  hand  and  cellular-mediated
immunity on the other, strictly related. The first one is expressed as antibodies
production, the second is mainly related to immune-competent cells. The damage is
perhaps correlated to the second process rather than to the antibodies production,
often epiphenomena of autoimmunity. Finally the elevation of TSH represents the
actual damage consequent to thyroid autoimmunity.
Our results demonstrated that in the pediatric population there is a lower AbT
positivity in conjunction with altered TSH. Probably because cell-mediated
immunity more than humoral immunity plays the more relevant role and humoral
autoimmunity remain ad epiphenomenon.
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
It could be assumed that in the natural history of thyroid autoimmunity the cell-
mediated anticipates the expression of humoral immunity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1054
EP1055
Thyroid dysfunction and insulin resistance
Mohamed Mohamed & Hala El Toukhy
Fayoum University, Fayoum, Egypt.
Background Insulin resistance (IR) is a state in which a given concentration of
insulin produces biological effect less than expected and IR actually make up a
broad clinical spectrum, including obesity, glucose intolerance, DM, and the
metabolic syndrome that are associated with various endocrine, metabolic, &
genetic conditions. There is an association of IR with thyroid abnormalities.
Evidence for a relationship between T4 and T3 and glucose metabolism appeared
over 100 years ago when the influence of hyperthyroidism in the deterioration of
glucose metabolism was first noticed. More, hypothyroidism has been linked to
decreased IR. Thyroid hormones exert both insulin agonistic and antagonistic
actions in different organs. However, this occurs in a fine balance necessary for
normal glucose metabolism. Deficit or excess of thyroid hormones can break this
equilibrium leading to alterations of carbohydrate metabolism. The aim of this
study  was  to  determine  the  association  between  thyroid  function  and  IR.
Methodology this study included 90 non diabetic patients recruited from Fayoum
university hospital 30 patients had hypothyroidism, 30 had hyperthyroidism & 30
were  euthyroid.  HOMA  IR  were  calculated.  Our  results  revealed,
50%  of
hypothyroid patients, 36% of hyperthyroid patients & only 16.5% of the euthyroid
patients had IR (PZ0.024). The mean body weight of the hyperthyroid group was
(73.3G8.7) was significantly lower than that of the euthyroid group (84.8G9.2)
and the hypothyroid group (86.7G11.3) (P!0.001). The mean BMI of the
Hypothyroid patients was higher (32.1G4.4) than the euthyroid group (30.1G
3.9) & the hyperthyroid group (26.0G3.3) (P!0.0001). Hypothyroid patients
were found to have a mean waist circumference that is greater (93.2G8.9) than
the  euthyroid
(88.00G8.3)  or  hyperthyroid
(81.7G5.1) group  (P!0.0001).
Conclusion insulin resistance is common in patients with abnormal thyroid
function compared to the euthyoid subjects.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1055
EP1056
ThyPROgr: translation and validation in Greek of the thyroid-specific
quality of life questionnaire ThyPRO
Gesthimani Mintziori1,2, Torquill Watt3, Dimitrios Pournaras2,
Emmanouil Tzortzis2, Marina Kita1 & Dimitrios Goulis2
1Department of Endocrinology, Ippokratio General Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece;2Unit of Reproductive Endocrinology, First Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Aristotle University Medical School,
Thessaloniki, Greece;3Department of Medical Endocrinology, Copenhagen
Universtiy Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction
Assessing the quality of life of patients with thyroid disease does represent a
challenge. ThypRO questionnaire has been developed recently and comprises
a reliable and valid scale structure of a patient-reported outcome measuring
thyroid-specific quality of life.
Material and methods
The standard methodology for translation of patient-reported outcomes was
followed. Two independent translators, Greek native speakers, fluent in english,
were asked to translate THyPRO questionnaire from English to Greek, in order to
form a consensus version of the questionnaire, after comparing the two versions.
A third translator was asked to back-translate this consensus version to English.
An in-country consultant and the developer of ThyPRO questionnaire then
reviewed the backwards translation and additional revisions were made. After
formation, ThyPROgr was tested among five patients with thyroid disorders with
cognitive interview techniques and additional changes in wording were made,
when necessary.
Results
ThyPRO  was  translated  and  validated  in  Greek  according  to  standard
methodology for translation of patient-reported outcomes.
Conclusion
ThyPROgr  provides  the  possibility  to  measure  patient-reported  outcomes
regarding thyroid-specific quality of life in the Greek population.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1056
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP1057
Antithyroid arthritis syndrome
Anne-Cécile Paepegaey, Maria Mavromati, Philippe Chanson &
Sylvie Salenave
Endocrinology and Reproductive Diseases, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux
de Paris, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Sud (site Bicêtre),
Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
The most frequent side effects of antithyroid drugs are skin reactions (6%),
gastrointestinal effects (5%) and arthralgia (5%). Other complications such as
antithyroid arthritis syndrome (1%), agranulocytosis (0.5%) and hepatitis (0.2%)
occur rarely.
We describe the case of a 20-year-old woman with Graves’ disease. Two weeks
after the beginning of carbimazole therapy, she developed an urticarial reaction
that led to discontinuation of treatment. Nevertheless, diffuse aching limbs
appeared abruptly later on. Due to the lack of clinical improvement, our patient
was admitted to the hospital. She had skin reaction with itching, skin rash,
dermatographic  urticaria,  and  arthralgia  involving  her  left  knee  and  right
shoulder. Treatment with antihistamin drugs and analgesics has been started but
arthralgia progressed to migratory oligoarthritis and body temperature increased
to 38 8C. Blood tests only showed inflammatory syndrome. Creatine kinase level,
joint X rays, left knee joint viral serologies, ANCA antibodies, rheumatoid factor,
anti-nuclear antibodies, anti CCP antibodies and anti SSA/RO antibodies were
normal.  The  patient  was  treated  with  anti-histamin  and  non-steroidal  anti-
inflammatory drugs as well as corticosteroids and clinical improvement occurred
a few weeks later with no recurrence of skin rash or arthralgia. Hyperthyroidism
was treated with 131 iodine.
Polyarthritis is a rare major side effect of antithyroid drugs. It is important to
distinguish anti thyroid arthritis syndrome from minor arthralgia. Contrary to
minor arthralgia, anti thyroid arthritis syndrome requires treatment discontinu-
ation, due to cross reactions between the different medications. The majority of
polyarthritis cases due to antithyroid treatment described in the literature appear
in an autoimmune context. Here we described a rare case of antithyroid arthritis
syndrome without evidence of autoimmunity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1057
EP1058
Relapse subacute thyroiditis: atypical symptoms
Dan Peretianu1, Mara Carsote2, Gabriela Voicu3, Daniela Neamtu3,
Andrei Goldstein3 & Ana Valea4
1SCM Povernei, Bucharest, Romania;2C. Davila University of Medicine
and Pharmacy & C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology,
Bucharest, Romania;3C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology,
Bucharest, Romania;4I. Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy &
Clinical County Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction
Subacute thyroiditis (ST) is a self limited condition; relapse is rarely seen.
Anterior cervical complains and inflammatory syndrome is highly suggestive.
Aim
We report a series of female cases associating arelapse of ST which was
confirmed after the admission for atypical distant symptoms as diffuse headache
or ear pain.
Material and Methods
The endocrine profile is presented.
Results
A 48-year patient was diagnosed with ST one year ago and treated with daily
prednisone for 3 months. On admission, she complains of asthenia, palpitations,
but mostly of persistent headache (not correlated with arterial hypertension).
Thyroid exam revealed a mild pain. Inflammatory tests showed: erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) of 63 mm/1-h, fibrinogen of 659.932 mg/dl (N:200-
500), C reactive protein (CRP) of 3.5 mg/dl (N:0-1 mg/dl). Thyroid ultrasound
showed: intense inhomogeneous aspects, a few nodules of !1 cm. TSH was
suppressed (of 0.016 mUI/ml, N:0.5-4.5 mUI/ml), high freeT4 (of 47.4 pmol/l,
N:10.3-24.4 pmol/l), and negative autoimmunity: TPO (anti-thyreoperoxidase
antibodies) of 10 UI/ml (N:0-35 UI/ml), TRAB (TSH-Receptor antibodies) of
0.3 UI/ml (N:!1UI/ml).131I radioiodine uptake was low: of 2% (at 2-h; N:12G
5%),  respective  of
3%  (at  24-h,  N:35G5%).  Oral  cortico-therapy
(daily
prednisone up to 20 mg/day) was further recommended for 8 more weeks
(when ESR decreased to 4mm/1-h, and TSH normalized to 2.27 mUI/ml).
A 37-year subject has an episode of ST 6 months ago and she was treated with
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. She was admitted for persistent intense
bilateral ear pain, weight loss (5 kilos/last month), and mild anterior cervical
sensibility only at palpation. Intense inhomogeneous pattern at ultrasound was
correlated with inhibited131I radioiodine uptake: of 0.8% (2-h), respective of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
0.2% (24-h). ESR of 109.6 mm/1-h, and CRP of 25 mg/dl, TSH!0.03 mUI/ml
were consistent for relapse of ST. After 2 months of prednisone ESR became
5.9 mm/1-h, and TSHZ1.7 mUI/ml.
Conclusion
Headache or otalgia represents atypical symptoms as clue for a relapse ST.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1058
EP1059
Hoffmann syndrome: a case report
Ines Barka, Amel Maaroufi, Wafa Badr, Yosra Hasni, Maha Kacem,
Molka Chadli Chaieb & Koussay Ach
Endocrinology Department, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse,
Tunisia.
Background
Hoffmann  syndrome  is  a  rare  form  of  hypothyroid  myopathy  in  adults
characterized by presence of muscle weakness, stiffness and pseudo-hypertrophy.
Here, we report a case of Hoffman syndrome aggravated by statin therapy.
Case report
We describe the case of a 60 year old woman with primary hypothyroidism who
presented with fatigue, cold intolerance, constipation, exertional breathlessness,
progressive proximal muscle weakness and swelling of the legs for 3 months. She
had a history of coronary heart disease treated by statin therapy. Examination
revealed pseudo-hypertrophy of calf muscles with marked symmetrical proximal
upper  and  lower  limb  weakness.  The  electrocardigram  revealed  an  atrial
fibrillation.
Her TSH and Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels were significantly elevated.
Following institution of replacement therapy with thyroxine, the patient showed
marked clinical and biochemical improvements after six months, but insignificant
decrease in muscle mass.
Conclusion
Hoffman syndrome is a very rare form of hypothyroid myopathy seen in adults
with longstanding untreated hypothyroidism. seen in adults with long standing
untreated hypothyroidism.
The diagnosis should be suspected when a patient with calf muscle hypertrophy is
also treated by statin therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1059
EP1060
Thyrolipoma: a rare entity of the thyroid gland
Betul Ekiz Bilir1, Ozlem Ozturk2, Bulent Bilir3, Neslihan Soysal Atile1 &
4
Hakan Ozkan
1Tekirdag State Hospital, Endocrinology Department, Tekirdag, Turkey;
2Tekirdag State Hospital, Pathology Department, Tekirdag, Turkey;3Namik
Kemal University, Medical Faculty, Internal Medicine Department,
Tekirdag, Turkey;4Tekirdag State Hospital, General Surgery Department,
Tekirdag, Turkey.
Introduction
Thyrolipoma (focal adenolipoma of thyroid gland) and thyrolipomatosis (diffuse
lipomatosis in the gland) are rarely encountered pathologies in daily practice. We
reported a case of small thyrolipoma incidentally diagnosed in a multinodular
goiter patient.
Case report
A 56 year-old man was admitted to our out-patient clinics with the complaint of a
lump in his cervical region. His thyroid function tests were normal. In physical
examination, a mobile soft nodule of about 4 cm in the left lobe was realized. In
thyroid ultrasonography, multiple nodules with a maximum dimension of 45!30
mm were reported. No pathological lymph nodes were detected. In fine needle
aspiration biopsy of the biggest nodule, benign thyrocytes with the presumption of
cystic colloidal nodule were reported. Because of the hugeness of the nodule and
multiple nodular nature, total thyroidectomy was performed. In thyroidectomy
pathology, bilateral multinodular hyperplasia and a thyrolipoma (coexistence of
mature adipocytes and thyroid follicular cells in a nodule) in 9!6 mm right lobe
nodule were detected. No adipose tissue infiltration other than this lesion was
detected in the whole thyroid gland. The patient recovered well after surgery and
levothyroxine replacement therapy was initiated.
Conclusions
Thyrolipomas are rare, benign, biologically inactive tumoral lesions of the thyroid
gland. Because of their relatively outer localization in the thyroid gland and its
fatty  nature  mimicking  parathyroid  glands,  they  might  be  confused  with
parathyroid glands intraoperatively.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1060
EP1061
A retrospective analysis of the relationship between obesity and thyroid
nodule size
Ozen Oz Gul, Soner Cander, Pinar Sisman, Erdinc Erturk & Canan Ersoy
Uludag University Medical School, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey.
Objective
The prevalence of overweight and obesity has been increasing for several
decades. Few studies have recently showed functional and morphological changes
of the thyroid gland in relation to obesity. The aim of this study was to correlate
thyroid nodule size with body mass index (BMI), waist-hip ratio (WHR) and
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels.
Methods
A total of 119 patients diagnosed with euthyroidic nodular goiter were included in
this retrospective study. The clinical presentations, anthropometric measurements,
thyroid function tests and ultrasonographic characteristics of patients were analyzed.
Results
The majority of the patients were female (79.8%) with a mean age of 56.3G15.4
years at the time of diagnosis. The patients were divided into two groups according
to a cut-off BMI value of 25 kg/m2. No statistically significant difference was found
between the groups in respect of gender, place of birth, place of residence, smoking
and family history. Thyroid US patterns were similar between groups. Thyroid
nodule size did not correlate with serum TSH, BMI and WHR in both of groups.
Conclusion
Our data showed that thyroid nodule size was not associated with weight, height,
BMI and WHR. Further studies are needed to confirm and to understand our
observation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1061
EP1062
A nonspecific complaint such as diarrhea in elderly with
hyperthyroidism: evaluation with a case
Sefa Sarac1, Pelın Tutuncuoglu3, Sumru Savas2 & Fulden Sarac2
1Department of Cardiology, Katip Celebi University, Ataturk Training and
Research Hospital, IZMIR, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine,
Section of Geriatrics, Ege University Medical Faculty, IZMIR, Turkey;
3Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Katip Celebi University,
Ataturk Training and Research Hospital, IZMIR, Turkey.
Introduction
Hyperthyroidism in the elderly can present with subtle nonspecific complaints.
Patients with long-standing goiter can develop autonomous nodules resulting in
toxic nodular goiter.
Case report
An 86 year old women was referred from gastroenterologist for thyroid disease
because of low TSH. She had diarrhea with five to eight bowel movements a day
for six months. She denied palpitations, heat intolerance or muscle weakness. She
had been noted to have goiter at about age 45 years. Some times, she was treated
with propyiltiouracil. There was a family history in her coisen. And also, she had
hypertensive and statin treatments such as valsartan and simvastatin, respectively.
After  she  had  suffered  from  diarrhea,  drugs  related  hypertension  and
hyperlipidemia were stopped. However, no change of characteristics of diarrhea
were found. Physical examination revealed markedly enlarged to at least to times
the normal size thyroid gland such as multinodular. The heart showed regular
rhythm. Pulse was 76 and blood pressure was 130/60 mmHg. There were no
thyroid eye sign. Laboratory data that accomanied the patient included TSH of
less than 0.01 mikroIU/ml (0.35-5.5), FT4 of 2.1 ng/dl (0.89-1.76), FT3 of 5.9
pg/ml (2.3-4.2). Thyroid nuclear scan showed irregular uptake with multiple hot
nodules bilaterally. Ultrasound of thyroid showed a left sided hypoechoic nodules
measuring 2!3 cm and 1.1!1 cm with minimal peripheral vascularity. And also,
1!1.5 cm solid and 1.3!2 cm cystic nodules were shown at the right lobe.
The diagnosis was toxic multinoduler goiter with subclinical hyperthyroidism.
However, she was clinically hyperthyroidism and was treated with RAI. After
1 moths, she was euthyroide and had no diarrhea and any complaint.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1062
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP1063
Autoimmune thyroid disease among type 2 diabetic Egyptian female
patients
Ibrahim El Ibrashy1, Amr El Meligi1, Laila Rashed2, Randa Fayez1,
Elham Youssef1 & Shaimaa Fathy1
1
Internal Medicine, Diabetes and Endocrinology-Faculty of Medicine-Cairo
University, Cairo, Egypt;2Medical Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology-Faculty of Medicine-Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
Background
High prevalence of thyroid disorders is more common in T1 compared to T2
Diabetes Mellitus due to the associated autoimmunity, with hypothyroidism being
the most common disorder.
Objectives
The  aim  of  this  study  is  to  assess  the  prevalence  of  autoimmune  thyroid
dysfunction among T2 diabetic Egyptian females and to find the correlation
between  the  metabolic  syndrome  components  and  autoimmune  thyroid
dysfunction.
Methods
The study included 62 T2 diabetic Egyptian female subjects and 27 sex and aged
matched controls. All patients in the study were subjected to anthropometric
measures, HbA1c, lipid profile, serum uric acid, TSH, FT3, FT4, Anti TPO, Anti
TG and thyroid ultrasound.
Results
Hypothyroidism was found in 45.2% of patients (5.49G3.37 mIU/ml) vs 11.1% of
controls
(1.79G1.21 mIU/ml)
(P!0.001). Anti TPO was found in
75.8%
(347.15G244.87 IU/ml) of patients vs 7.4% (32.89G33.26 IU/ml) of control
(P!0.001). Anti TG was found in 61.3% (508.03G369.16 IU/ml) of patients
versus 0% (51.26G35.53 IU/ml) of control (P!0.001). A significant positive
correlation was found between TSH and antithyroid antibodies (ATG, ATPO)
(P: 0.002, 0.043 respectively) and between TSH and thyroid gland volume
(P: 0.002) in diabetic patients. No correlation was found between all components
of metabolic syndrome and thyroid antibodies in diabetic patients.
Conclusion
Autoimmune thyroid disease is more common in Egyptian women with T2
diabetes than non diabetic women and therefore raising a role of autoimmunity in
the pathogenesis of T2DM.
Keywords: autoimmune thyroid disease, TSH, Anti TPO, Anti TG, T2 Diabetes,
Metabolic syndrome
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1063
EP1064
Autoimmunity as a cause of goiter, obesity and miscarriage in north of
Iran, an iodine sufficient area
Behnaz Bazrafshan1, Payam Sarmadi2,3, Hamidreza Bazrafshan2,3,
Nemat Nematollahi2 & Gunter Stalla3
1Medical Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Golestan University of
Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran;
2Toloo Endocrine clinic, Tehran, Iran;
3Neuroendocrinology Group, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich,
Germany.
Introduction
The thyroid gland plays an important role in metabolism of human body.
Abnormal growth of this gland is called Goiter. Iodine deficiency was thought to
be the main cause of goiter. However, despite years of salt iodization, goiter
continues to be a major public health, worldwide. As the thyroid gland is the most
common  organ  affected  by  autoimmune  diseases,  it  is  suggested  that
autoimmunity can disturb thyroid function and develop to goiter. This study
tries to investigate the relationship between goiter and Anti-TPO as a marker of
autoimmunity.
Method
In  this  cross-sectional  study
150
goiter  patients  who  were  referred  to
endocrinology clinic of Gorgan, Iran were observed. Thyroid function tests
(T3, T4, and TSH) and Anti TPO were investigated in all patients. BMI was also
calculated by measurement of height and weight.
Results
In general, 132 women and 18 men were studied. There were 50 simple goiters, 50
hypothyroid and 50 hyperthyroid patients. Overall, 110 patients had positive and
40 Patients had Negative Anti-TPO. Anti-TPO positive patients were significantly
higher in Hypothyroid and Hyperthyroid groups in comparison with simple goiter
patients
(P Value!0.05), while there was no significant difference between
Hypothyroid and Hyperthyroid groups. The average of BMI in Anti-TPO positive
patients was significantly higher. Women with positive Anti-TPO had also a
higher rate of miscarriage.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
In iodine sufficient areas, autoimmunity can affect thyroid function and can be a
major cause of goiter. Autoimmunity can also be an important cause of obesity
and miscarriage.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1064
EP1065
Large thyroid cysts
Ancuta Augustina Gheorghisan-Galateanu1, Mara Carsote1,
Claudiu Tupea2, Anda Dumitrascu2, Ana Valea3, Eugenia Petrova2,
Andrei Goldstein2 & Adina Ghemigian1
1C. Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy & C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;3I. Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy & Clinical County Hospital, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania.
Introduction
Thyroid  fluid-filled  cavities  are  mostly  resulted  from  degenerating  thyroid
adenomas but blood vessel anomalies are also described. Despite the typical
benign behavior the local anatomical effects may require fine needle aspiration or
directly surgery.
Materials and methods
This is series of cases presenting intermittent breathing problems leading to the
diagnosis of thyroid cysts. Thyroid evaluation included ultrasound, computed
tomography (CT), TSH assay (Thyroid Stimulating Hormone), TPO antibodies
(anti-thyreoperoxidase), circulating calcitonin.
Results
A 28-year female was evaluated for irregular menses, weight gain, and occasional
dyspnea. The personal medical history is irrelevant. The investigations confirmed
polycystic ovaries syndrome but also a hemorrhagic thyroid cyst of 4.3 by 2.9 by
2.88 cm (with several hyper-echoic areas insight, and a left deviation of the
trachea) was detected by ultrasound (a right thyroid lobe of 3.15 by 3.3 by 5.35
cm, left lobe of 1.92 by 1.53 by 4.82 cm) with homogenous structure. Thyroid
profile was normal: TSHZ0.78 mUI/ml (N:0.5-4.5 mUI/ml), TPOZ10 UI/ml
(N:0-35 UI/ml),  FreeT4Z14.3 pmol/l
(N:10.3-24.4
pmol/l),  calcito-
ninZ3.38 pg/ml (N:5.17-9.82 pg/ml). Total thyroidectomy is recommended.
A 47-year female, known with Raynaud’s syndrome and euthyroid Hasmimoto’s
thyroiditis presents from the last two weeks mild breathing troubles. 15 years ago
she has an episode of nephritic syndrome and corticotherapy was offered for a few
months. On admission, thyroid profiles reveled: TSHZ1.19 mUI/ml, TPOZ143
UI/ml, calcitoninZ1 pg/ml with a hypo-echoic ultrasound pattern and a large cyst
of 3 by 2.32 by 2.93 cm with negative 131 iodine uptake at scintigram. CT pointed
a well shaped, encapsulated cyst emerging to the anterior superior mediastinum of
17-33 Hounsfield Units. The mass removal was done and benign features were
found.
Conclusion
Regarding the first case, the polycystic ovaries syndrome is most probably
incidental with the thyroid cystic lesion. Whether autoimmune background and
previous prednisone administration may contribute to a thyroid cyst formation is
difficult to establish.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1065
EP1066
Hypertrophic Hashimoto’s thyroiditis mimicking thyroid lymphoma
Dan Alexandru Niculescu1,3, Radu Iorgulescu1,2, Anda Dumitrascu3 &
Catalina Poiana1,3
1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania;
2St. John Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania;3C. I. Parhon Institute
of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) is a well known risk factor for thyroid lymphoma.
A rapidly enlarging goiter accompanied by lymph nodes pressure on surrounding
structures usually suggest the development of thyroid lymphoma.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Case report
An 85 years old hypertensive women presented for a massive goiter extending
from the lower jaw to clavicle which increased in size for the last 5 months. She
also complained of dysphagia, hoarseness and shortness of breath. Two previous
computed  tomographies
(CT)  showed  a  huge  diffuse  goiter  progressively
narrowing the cervical trachea and cervical and mediastinal grossly enlarged
lymph nodes. A suspicious cervical lymph node was removed and the pathology
report  suggested  a  small  B-cell  non-Hodgkin  lymphoma.  However,  the
immunohistochemistry was in favour of a nonspecific lymphadenitis. In our
clinic the cervical CT confirmed the massive diffuse goiter, at least 32 by 53 by
89 mm per lobe. The goiter was intensely hypoechoic on ultrasound suggesting
HT or thyroid lymphoma. Thyroperoxidase and thyroglobulin antibodies were
strongly positive (over 1000 UI/ml and 3000 UI/ml respectively) but the thyroid
function was almost normal (thyroid stimulating hormone was 4.9 mU/l). Serum
2.2
calcitonin was
pg/ml. An open thyroid biopsy was performed and the
pathology indicated HT. No treatment was started and after 2 months the goiter
was still increasing in size but with widening of the trachea and relieve of
symptoms. The autoimmunity was similar and the thyroid function continued to
be normal.
Conclusions
Hypertrophic HT can clinically and imagistically mimic thyroid lymphoma. An
open biopsy of the thyroid may be required in these cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1066
EP1067
The level of awareness on thyroid disorders
Sibel Ocak Serin1, Muzaffer Ilhan1, Seda Ahci1, Yildiz Okuturlar2,
Guven Koc1, Tulay Eyupgiller1, Ridvan Sivritepe1 & Sema Ucak1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Umraniye Education and Research
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Bakirkoy
Dr. Sadi Konuk Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Objective
To  evaluate  the  level  of  awareness  among  patients  with  thyroid  disorders
presenting to our hospital and determine patient profiles.
Design
The present study was conducted using a survey technique on patients aged
between 18 and 75 years, who were admitted to our hospital for follow-up
between December 1, 2014 and December 31, 2014. The pregnant women and
those with a thyroid malignancy and patients who did not consent for the study
were excluded. Demographic data such as age, gender, educational level, disease
duration, control frequency as well as drug usage pattern, dose, duration and
whether or not the patient received fixed dose drug regimen and food/drugs that
are not to be taken with the drug were recorded. Type of salt used by the patients
was also recorded.
Results
An interview was conducted with a total of 107 patients (4 males [3.7%] and 103
females [96.3%]) with a mean age of 46 years. Of these patients, 85 (79.4%)
attended follow-up visits for more than a one-year period and most patients
(nZ56) were seen at least three times in the last one year (52.4%). Of these
patients, 69 (64.5%) had hypothyroidism, 11 (10.3%) had hyperthyroidism, and
the remaining 27 patients (25.2%) had euthyroid nodular goitre. It was found that
78 patients (72.9%) were inaccurately or incompletely informed about their
disease. Of the patients, 54 (50.4%) were aware that they needed to use iodized
salt and 41 patients (38.4%) were not aware of how to use the salt. When the
patients in the study were asked whether they were aware of food and drugs
interacting with levothyroxine, 55 patients (86%) were not aware of these food
and drugs. Approximately 30% of patients used iron supplements and proton
pump inhibitors together with levothyroxine.
Conclusions
The patients with thyroid disorders had a low level of awareness and low level of
knowledge  about  their  disease,  follow-up  data  and  their  treatments.  The
physicians must make an endeavor to increase the level of awareness among
the patients.
Keywords: thyroid disease, awareness, iodine deficiency, drug interaction
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1067
EP1068
Glomerular filtration rate in euthyroid Hashimoto’s patients
Yasemin Coskun Firat1, Ozge Timur2, Can Sevinc1, Faruk Yildiz2,
Emine Kartal Baykan3, Unsal Aydin3, Mehmet Emin Budak2,
Hakan Gozcu2, Abdulmuttalip Arslan2, Hakan Sevimli2 & Ayse Carlioglu3
1Regional Training and Research Hospital, Department of Nephrology,
Erzurum, Turkey;2Regional Training and Research Hospital, Department of
Internal Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey;3Regional Training and Research
Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, Erzurum, Turkey.
Thyroid  hormones  influence  renal  development,  kidney  structure,  renal
hemodynamics, glomerular filtration rate, the function of many transport systems
along  the  nephron  and  sodium  and  water  homeostasis.  Patients  with
hypothryoidism can have clinically important reductions in glomerular filtration
rate
(GFR).
41
patients
(mean  age
31.5G11  years)  newly  diagnosed  as
Hashimoto thyroiditis with presence of high thyroid autoantibodies with gland
heterogenity in ultrasound and age-matched 30 healthy subjects attending to
Erzurum  Research  and  Training  Hospital  Endocrine  outpatient  clinic  were
included to the study. GFR of the patients and control groups were calculated
using 4 variable MDRD Formula. GFRO125 ml/dk considered as hyperfiltration.
Pearson correlation test was made to determine the correlation between FT3, FT4,
TSH, anti TPO, anti TG and GFR. There was no significant correlation between
FT3, FT4 and GFR. (rZ0.12, PZ0.33). There was positive correlation between
anti  TPO (rZ0.32,  PZ0.02), anti  TG (rZ0.29,  PZ0.03)  and GFR.  GFR
decreases with age and BMI. In our study GFR was found decreased independent
from age, gender and BMI. Although our study is one of the first studies to
examine the association between GFR and thyroid autoimmunity was insufficient
in explaining the mechanism.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1068
EP1069
The efficacy of Radioiodine Therapy in Patients with Graves’ Disease
Anna Dabrowska1, Jolanta Kijek2, Jerzy Tarach1, Anna Torun-Jurkowska3,
Beata Chrapko2 & Maria Kurowska1
1Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Medical University of Lublin,
Lublin, Poland;2Chair and Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical
University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland;3Department of Mathematics and
Medical Biostatistics, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
Introduction
Radioiodine (RAI) has been used for the treatment of Graves’ hyperthyroidism
since 1940s. It is relatively safe and considered as one of the definitive therapies.
Achievement of hypothyroidism or euthyroidism is defined as a successful
therapy.
Methods
The study was conducted in 366 patients (80.60% of women) with Graves’
disease (GD), aged 46.76G13.52 years. We analyzed retrospectively hormonal
and imaging findings (scintigraphy, ultrasonography), including isotopic results
in  subjects  treated  at  Department  of  Nuclear  Medicine  and  Endocrinology
Department during the eight-year period. The efficacy of RAI therapy has been
assessed based on free thyroid hormones levels, measured 12 months after
radioiodine administration.
Results
Mean concentrations of thyroid hormones before therapy were: FT4-38.40G
22.17
(12.0-22.0 pmol/l) and FT3-21.9G17.11 (3.0-7.0 pmol/l). The thyroid
mass was estimated to be 69.67G38.87 g. Mean RAI 24-h uptake was 63.93G
16.15% and therapeutic activity of RAI, calculated using Marinelli’s formula, was
544.28G176.35 MBq. The used thyroid-absorbed doses of RAI (Gy) were:
%120, O120 and %150, O150 (49.18% vs 46.99% vs 3.83% of subjects with
GD, respectively). After RAI therapy, hypothyroidism was found in 39.34% GD
participants (39.34% of F; 39.44% of M), euthyreosis - in 24.32% (25.42% of F;
19.72% of M) and hyperthyroidism - in 36.34% (35.26% of F; 40.84% of M).
The efficacy of RAI therapy was achieved in 63.66% of patients (F-64.75%;
M-59.15%). An effective cure of hyperthyroidism was significantly correlated
with lower: thyroid mass (59.35G33.26g vs 87.75G41.43g; PZ0.000), RAI
24-h uptake (62.64G16.54% vs 66.20G15.21%; PZ0.042) and, surprisingly,
administered dose (519.25G180.16MBq vs 588.12G175.63MBq; PZ0.000).
No significant associations between successful therapy and patients’ age, levels
of free thyroid hormones before therapy and thyroid absorbed dose were found.
Conclusions
RAI therapy was effective in 63.66% of patients with GD. Females responded
better to treatment than males. The cure correlated with thyroid mass, RAI 24-h
uptake and dose of radioiodine.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1069
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP1070
The course of chronic autoimmune thyroiditis in pregnant women
during iodine and selenium therapy
Zsuzsanna Szántó1, Attila Csiszér2, Imre Zoltán Kun3 &
Zsuzsanna Croitorescu4
1Department of Endocrinology,University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tirgu
Mures, Romania;2Regional Center of Public Health Tîrgu Mures, National
Institute of Public Health, Tirgu Mures, Romania;3Doctoral School,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tirgu Mures, Romania;4Central
Laboratory of Mures County Clinical Hospital, Tirgu Mures, Romania.
Introduction
In iodine deficient regions maternal iodine supply is indispensable for the normal
development of the fetus, but it might aggravate autoimmune thyroid diseases in
the mother during pregnancy and postpartum. Selenium might be beneficent
in these thyroid diseases by defending against the harmful effect of iodine on
maternal thyroiditis.
Objective
To study  the course of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis in pregnant  women, under
combined therapy with l-thyroxin, selenium and iodine.
Material and method
In 13 pregnant women with chronic autoimmune thyroiditis we measured TSH,
free-T4, anti-thyroid peroxidase-antibody (TPO-Ab), anti-thyroglobulin-antibody
(Tg-Ab), serum selenium and urinary iodine concentration in the I-II trimester.
Then l-thyroxin, selenium and iodine treatment was initiated, and thyroid function
and the level of mentioned antibodies were followed in the IIIrd trimester and in
the postpartum period.
Results
Urinary iodine excretion was low, or at the lower normal limit in eight pregnant
women, from them 3 women associated reduced selenium level, too. TPO-Ab was
increased in 12 women, only Tg-Ab in one. All women received l-thyroxine, and
we  combined  to  this  iodine
(100-200
microg/day)  and  selenium
(50-200
microg/day). In all cases the level of thyroid antibodies decreased gradually
during pregnancy, moreover in two cases it became normal, but after delivery
all began to increase. Postpartum overt thyrotoxicosis developed in three cases
(25%), which improved spontaneously within 2 months (meanwhile iodine was
reduced or stopped, and selenium continued).
Conclusion
Despite universal salt iodization implemented since 2002, iodine deficiency was
detected in considerable part (8/13) of pregnant women with chronic autoimmune
thyroiditis, requiring iodine supply. Combined therapy with l-thyroxine, selenium
and iodine did not increase the level of thyroid autoantibodies during pregnancy,
moreover it was decreased. Conversely, their level increased gradually in the
postpartum period, when the maternal immunity return to pre-pregnant state, and
in 25% of the cases overt thyrotoxicosis developed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1070
EP1071
Ectopic Thyroid Tissue: Imagery Findings versus Pathological Report
Ancuta Augustina Gheorghisan-Galateanu1, Mara Carsote1,
Anda Dumitrascu2, Ana Valea3, Andreea Geleriu4, Dana Terzea5 &
Adina Ghemigian1
1C. Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy & C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2C.I. Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;3I. Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy & Clinical County Hospital, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;4Lujerului Polyclinic, Queen Mary Healthcare Private Network,
Bucharest, Romania;5C.I. Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology &
Monza Oncoteam, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Accessory thyroid tissue is a part of thyroid dysgenesis and sometime represents
an incidental adult finding displaying a normal function.
Material and Methods
This is a case presentation of an adult admitted for an atypical anterior cervical
aspect which could not be recognized as accessory thyroid tissue only after
surgery. Thyroid evaluation used imagery like ultrasound, computed tomography
(CT), assays as TSH (Thyroid Stimulating Hormone), calcitonin, TPO antibodies
(anti-thyreoperoxidase).
Results
A 62-year male is diagnosed with prostate cancer at age of 58 and treated with
radiotherapy and hormone blocking therapy with consecutive normalization of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
specific prostate antigen. His father was diagnosed and treated for bone cancer.
While evaluation for his previous oncologic condition, CT scan with contrast
revealed asymmetrical thyroid with a mass of unknown origin at the cervical
lateral level, left to the esophagus, of oval shape with regular margins. The 2
centimeter -sized mass causes a small deviation of the esophagus, and it has a
hypo-dense  spontaneous  structure.  Thyroid  function  was  normal
(TSH  of
0.9 mUI/ml,  N:0.5-4.5 mUI/ml),  negative  TPO  and normal  calcitonin and
parathormone of 24.48 pg/ml (N:15-65 pg/ml). A paraganglioma was suspected
based  on  high  circulating serotonin  of
423 ng/ml
(N:40-400 ng/mll)  but
otherwise   normal   profile
24-h   urinary   metanephrines   of
72 mg
(N:50-450 mg/24-h),  and  normetaneprines  of
274 mg
(N:100-600 mg/24-h),
plasma metanephrines of 29.6 pg/ml (N:10-90 pg/ml), plasma normetanephrines
of
82.2 pg/ml (N:15-180 pg/ml), chromogranin A of 102 ng/ml (N:20-125),
neuron specific enolase of 9.13 ng/ml (N:0-12 ng/ml). The surgical removal was
performed and thyroid tissue of adenomatous type was found. No malignancy,
neither  surrounding  tissues  were  presented  so  a  late  diagnosis  of  thyroid
dysgenesis was established.
Conclusion
Accessory thyroid tissue might not be highly suggestive at CT or ultrasound
especially if the late diagnosis is done during adult years. The presence of a prior
malignancy may require several imagery tests and consecutive discovery of the
thyroid dysgenesia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1071
EP1072
Iodine status and thyroid volume in pregnant women
M Dolores Ollero1,2, Marta Toni1,2, Juan Pablo Martinez1, Jose
Javier Pineda1,2, Mercedes Espada3 & Emma Anda1,2
1Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition. Complejo Hospitalario de
Navarra., Pamplona, Navarra, Spain;2Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de
Navarra (Idisna), Navarra, Spain;3Laboratory of Public Health,
Departament of Health, Gobierno Vasco, Vizcaya, Spain.
Introduction
Adequate iodine intake is important in pregnant women.
Objective
To determinate iodine status and thyroid volumen (TV) in healthy pregnant
women from Navarra (Spain), and to evaluate possible influence of diet.
Methods
A cross-sectional study of 144 women in the first trimester of pregnancy (single
pregnancies) was carried during 2014. We measured thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH), free thyroxine (fT4) and antithyroid antibodies in serum at 9 week of
gestational age, and urinary iodine
(UI) in a spot-urine sample. A thyroid
ultrasonography was performed, and a questionnaire to estimate iodine intakes
from diet, iodized salt and supplements was cumplimented at 10 week of
gestational age.
Results
Studied women were 90.3% caucasic, mean age was 33.6G4.1 years old and
mean BMI 24.3G4.4. A total of 100 subjects (69.4%) consumed iodized salt, 75
of them before pregnancy. All women were taking iodinated supplements (200
mg/day), 40% pregestational. Serum TSH was 1.57G1 mIU/l and fT4 1.04G0.1
ng/dl. Thyroid antibodies were positive in 23 women (16%). Median UI at 10
gestational week was 242 mg/l, considered adequate by WHO criteria. 31.9% of
women (nZ46) had UI !150 mg/l, and only 4.9% !50 mg/l. Mean TV was 8.1G
2.5
ml. Serum TSH, fT4 and thyroid autoinmunity were similar in iodine-
sufficient and iodine-insufficient women (UI R150 and !150 mg/l respectively).
TV in iodine-insufficient women was greater than in iodine-sufficient group
(8.9G2.6 vs 7.7G2.4 ml; PZ0.008). There were no differences in age, BMI,
smoking status, use of iodized salt, pregestational use of iodine supplements or
estimates of iodine intake from diet between UI!150 and UI R150 mg/l women.
Conclusions
Pregnant  women  of  our  population  are  iodine  sufficient,  probably  due  to
sistematic use of iodine supplements and high consume of iodized salt. Thyroid
volume was larger in iodine-insufficient women. We failed to identify other diet
factors associated with iodine status.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1072
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1073
Efficacy and safety of radioiodine therapy for mild Graves’
ophthalmopathy in dependence on nicotine consumption
Agata Czarnywojtek1,2, Krzesislawa Komar-Rychlicka3,
Malgorzata Zgorzalewicz-Stachowiak4, Kosma Wolinski1,
Adam Stangierski1, Barbara Torlinska5, Ewa Florek6, Joanna Waligorska-
Stachura1 & Marek Ruchala1
1Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland;2Department of
Pharmacology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland;
3Department of Ophtalmology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland;4Laboratory of Medical Electrodiagnostics, Department of
Health Prophylaxis, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland;5Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism Institute of
Biomedical Research, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK;66Laboratory of Environ-
mental Research, Department of Toxicology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Introduction
Graves ‘Orbitopathy (GO), is an autoimmune disease associated with Graves’
thyrotoxicosis (GT). The therapy is largely dependent on the severity and activity
of ocular changes. Additionally, the severity of GO is influenced by exogenous
factors, such as thyroid dysfunction, cigarette smoking or radioiodine therapy
(RIT). The aim of the study was to indicate how radioiodine therapy (RIT)
influences on GO in smoking and non-smoking patients.
Materials and methods
Patients with GO treated in the Departments of Endocrinology in Poznan between
March 2014 and October 2014 were included. Ophthalmological signs were
evaluated by visual acuity, cover test, tonometry, fundus examination, lid fissure
measurement, visual test, Hertel’s exopthalmometer and Hess-Landcaster screen
measure. Presence and activity of GO was assessed using standardized scales
such as the Clinical Activity Scale (CAS). The study protocol included also
measurement of the serum levels of TSH, thyroid hormone, TPO-Abs, Tg-Abs,
TSHR-Abs, and urine cotinine. All patients received an identical therapeutic high
dose of 800 MBq131I. Analyses were conducted at baseline, 2 and 6 months after
therapy. Data from anamnesis on the tobacco smoking where confirmed by
measurement of cotinine in urine.
Results
Statistically significant differences in serum level of TSHR-Abs were found
between non-smokers and smokers at 2 (P!0.001) and 6 months after RIT
(P!0.0001). In smokers, statistically significant differences in the assessment of
the severity of ophthalmopathy were observed. The ophthalmological signs
assessed by the CAS scale occurred more intensely in smokers before (PZ0.003)
and after RIT (PZ0.0001). 46.2% of smokers and 4.3% of non-smokers were
subsequently upstaged from mild to moderate GO (CAS scale) after 6 months.
Conclusions
Ocular changes occur with higher intensity in the group of smokers. High dose of
RAI does not induce exacerbation of ophthalmopathy in non-smokers.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1073
EP1074
What is the cut-off level for commercial kits for antithyroperoxydase
antibody
Mara Carsote1, Mihaela Ratcu2, Payman Gharibafshar2, Denis Paduraru3,
Dana Cristina Staicu2 & Dan Peretianu2
1Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2Medical Center
“Povernei”, Bucharest, Romania;3Institue of Sportive Medicine, Bucharest,
Romania.
Aim
The biological diagnostic of Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT) is based on higher than
normal  levels of  antithyroperoxydase  antibodies
(ATPO). Our  goal  was to
establish the cut-off limit of normality (the upper limit) for ATPO in our thyroid
normal patients. This limit and not that of the laboratory, should be used as
diagnosis of Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Material and method
1. ATPO was investigated in patients with normal level of thyroid hormones
(euthyroidism) and normal ultrasound of thyroid (linear probe at 7.5 MHz).
2. ATPO was analyzed in several Bucharest laboratories, accredited for this
investigation.  The  laboratory  cut-off  limit  for  normality  was
34
Ul/ml.
3. Conventionally, the normality is considered as the average (mean) plus/minus
standard deviation multiply by 2.
Results
A. Patients: 268; women, 227, men, 41, age, average, 45, 87, median, 44; average
TSH, 1.8 mUI/ml, FT4, 15.6 nmol/l.
B. ATPO level was: average: 8.65 UI/ml, standard deviation: 7.22. Therefore, the
upper limit should be 23.08 UI/ml.
Discussion
Based on 34 UI/ml cut-off limit, we registered 1510 patients with HT (higher
ATPO), 129 patients with only high antithyroglobuline thyroiditis (ATG-T)
(lower ATPO), and 108 patients with idiopathic myxedema (hypothyroidism,
lower ATPO/ATG, and inflammatory ultrasound signs). Considering ATPO cut-
off 23 UI/ml, 15 (11.9%) ATG-T and 6 (4.6%) myxedema were in fact HT
patients.
Conclusions
1. Using the date from our patients, the cut-off limit for ATPO should be 23 UI/ml
and not 34 UI/ml. 2. Based on 23 UI/ml cut-off limit, the number of patients with
Hashimoto thyroiditis increased by 9l.5%.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1074
EP1075
Toxic adenoma as a cause of dementia
Blertina Dyrmishi1, Taulant Olldashi1, Eris Ranxha1, Thanas Fureraj2,
Agron Ylli2 & Entela Puca1
1Hygeia Hospital Tirana, Tirana, Albania;2UHC “Mother Teresa”, Tirana,
Albania.
Background
Psychiatric symptoms have been reported quite frequently in thyroid disease.
Dementia associated with hyperthyroidism is less well documented.
The case
We present the case of a 62 years old woman, who initially presented for
a neurological consultation about her symptoms suggested Alzheimer’s disease.
The patient had been under treatment for more than seven years for type 2
diabetes and developed frequently episodes of hypoglycemia. She was treated the
treatment by neurologist as dementia, but the symptoms did not improve, so she
was admitted to our hospital. The thyroid function problem had never been
suspected at the patient.
During the consultation, we found a big nodule in the left side of the thyroid, with
tachycardia and high blood glucose values. Clinically, hyperthyroidism was
suspected.
Lab Data: TSH 0.01 mUI/ml (Normal range 0.35-4.78); FT3 9.63 pg/ml (Normal
range 2.3-4.2); FT4 3.48 ng/dl (Normal range 0.89-1.76); Glucose 182 mg/dl;
HbA1c 5.5%; FBC - Normal
Thyroid ultrasound: A nodule in the left side of thyroid, its dimensions 5.0 ! 3.5
cm, with heterogenic structure and microcalcifications. Right lobe of thyroid
normal.
Thyroid scan with Tc99: Hot nodule in the left side of thyroid. Uptake 11%.
Head MR: Normal
A treatment with methimazole and b-blockers was started and the diabetes pills
was stopped, since a secondary diabetes related to hyperthyroidism developed.
Four weeks after the start of the treatment the patients improved, without any
symptoms of dementia. The thyroidectomy was recommended.
Conclusions
Since thyroid disease can be associated with various psychiatric symptoms, we
recommend checking thyroid function at the patient with psychiatric diseases
even in a patient with “possible” Alzheimer’s disease.
hyperthyroidism, psychosis, dementia.
Keywords: hyperthyroidism, psychosis, dementia.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1075
EP1076
Secondary hypothyroidism and the tarsal tunnel syndrome
Blertina Dyrmishi1, Taulant Olldashi1, Neritan Borici1, Thanas Fureraj2 &
Agron Ylli2
1Hygeia Hospital Tirana, Tirana, Albania;2UHC “Mother Tirana”, Tirana,
Albania.
Clinical Case
We referred one case with primary hypothyroidism and tarsal tunnel syndrome.
The boy 11 6/12 years old was presents in our clinic with fatigue, obesity,
difficulty during walking, low performance in school, hyposthenia and dementia.
His weight was 48 kg C3.8 DS; height 153 cm C2 DS; the patient has bilateral
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
symptoms of the tarsal tunnel syndrome and his foot symptom was aggravated by
walking. The hormonal values were: TSH 2.3 mUI/ml (0.35-4.04); FT4 0.54
ng/dl (0.93-1.7); FT3 1.97 ng/dl (2.3-4.2); Ac anti TPO 12.2 UI/ml; Ac anti
Thyroglobulin 24 UI/ml, Thyroid ultrasound: Isoecogenic structure in both lobes
of thyroid. MRI of head: Normal; The electro diagnostic study show evidence of
bilateral tarsal tunnel syndrome (examination show chronic diffuse suffering of
neurologic type of central origin with normal distal motor latencies bilaterally.
Compression of tibial nerve in the tarsal tunnel. The patient begin the treatment
with levothyroxine and after 6 months of treatment the FT3 and FT4 was normal;
FT4 1.17 ng/dl; FT3 3.4 ng/dl; but the tarsal syndrome is not improved and he was
underwent surgical treatment for tarsal tunnel release.
Conclusion
Prolonged  untreated  hypothyroidism  may  have  neurological  complication
including tarsal tunnel syndrome
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1076
EP1077
Assessment of thyroid function during the three trimesters of pregnancy
in alexandria region (Egypt)
F E Amara1, M H Megalaa1, Y I Oraif2, M G Moawad1, M A Korani3,
M F Amara1 & S El-Sheikh1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Alexandria University, Alexandria,
Egypt;2Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt;3Department of Internal Medicine, Menofia University,
Alexandria, Egypt.
Introduction
Pregnancy is associated with significant reversible changes in thyroid functions
due to certain hormonal changes e.g. HCG and estrogen.
Objective
To study thyroid functions in different trimesters of pregnancy compared to
control age matched non pregnant women.
Design and Methods
Cross sectional study of 90 pregnant women divided into three groups in the three
trimesters of pregnancy compared to 30 ages matched non-pregnant women.
Study of FT3, FT4, TSH and TPO using COBAS analyser.
Results
In general, our study showed significant differences between pregnant and non-
pregnant women regarding FT4 and TSH but not FT3 and antiTPO. Thyroid
function abnormalities were increased with advance in pregnancy.
Conclusion
The discrepancy between FT4 and TSH in pregnancy is mostly due to presence of
many stimulatory and inhibitory factors. Screening of FT4, TSH, HCG and TPO
is important during pregnancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1077
EP1078
Relationship to TSH, and interleukin levels patients with Hashimoto’s
Thyroiditis
Bedia Guleryuz1, Fulya Akin2, Senay Topsakal2, Guzin Fidan Yaylalı2,
Sebahat Turgut3, Melek Tunç Ata3 & Mukaddes Mergen Dalyanoglu3
1Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Pamukkale
University, Kinikli Campus, Denizli, 20070, Turkey;2Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Kinikli Campus,
Denizli, 20070, Turkey;3Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Pamukkale University, Kinikli Campus, Denizli, 20070, Turkey.
Background
Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis (HT) is the most common clinical expression of thyroid
dysfunction and result from organ-specific autoimmune reaction. Cytokines are
play an important role in autoimmunity, by stimulating B and T cells.
The aim of this study is to examine the relationship between cytokines and thyroid
function tests in patient with Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis
Methods
139
cases  with  HT  included  this  study.  Subjects  were  recruited  from
Endocrinology Clinic of Pamukkale University in Turkey. Serum levels of sT3
(pg/ml) sT4(ng/dl) TSH (mIU/ml) were measured and IL-4, IL-5, TNF-a, IFN-g
analysis were performed with Elisa kits.
Results
IL-4, and IFN-g levels were significantly correlated with TSH levels. (P!0.01)
TNF-a level was correlated with TSH levels, but was not statistically significant.
IL-2 and IL-5 were not correlated with TSH levels.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Conclusion
Studies shows that there is a relationship between thyroid function tests with
cytokines.In  thyroidal  and  nonthyroidal  diseases  that  occur  during  thyroid
dysfunction, it is considered that can be realized through cytokines. In our study
we observed a correlation between thyroid function and cytokines, and we believe
that supports this view.
Keywords:  TSH,  IL-2,  IL-4,  IL-5,  IFN-g,  TNF-a  Levels,  Hashimoto’s
Thyroiditis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1078
EP1079
Evaluation of ovarian reserve in terms of ovarian volume, antral
follicule count and hormonal tests in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Turkan Mete1, Aysu Basak Ozbalci2, Elif Kilic Kan1, Gulhan Duman1,
Halise Cinar Yavuz3, Gultekin Ozan Kucuk4, Ismail Ozer5, Hacer Pinar
Ozturk Kurt6 & Aysegul Atmaca7
1Ministry of Health, Samsun Training and Research Hospital Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Samsun, Turkey;2Ministry of Health,
Samsun Training and Research Hospital Department Of Radiology,
Samsun, Turkey;3Turgut Ozal University, School of Medicine Department
of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;4Ministry of Health,
Samsun Training and Research Hospital Department Of General Surgery,
Samsun, Turkey;5Ministry of Health, Samsun Training and Research
Hospital Department Of Nephrology, Samsun, Turkey;6Ministry of Health,
Samsun Training and Research Hospital Department Of Internal Medicine,
Samsun, Turkey;7School of Medicine, Ondokuz Mayis University
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Samsun, Turkey.
Introduction
Our aim is to investigate whether ovarian reserve is decreased in patients with
euthyroid Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT).
Method
Our study included 110 euthyroid HT patients and 72 age matched healthy
women (controls; C). In all patients FSH, LH E2, and P levels were measured
from blood samples, and ovarian volumes (OV) and antral follicule count (AFC)
were measured using ultrasonography at 3rd day of menstruation.
Results
No statistically significant difference was detected in FSH, LH, E2 and P levels
between groups (P value respectively; 0.117, 0.420, 0.941, 0.644). Total ovarian
volumes were not statistically different between groups (PZ0.165). Total AFC
were significantly lower in the HT group than the controls (P!0.001). Total AFC
were strongly and negatively correlated with AntiTPO (rZK0.215, PZ0.004)
and AntiTg (rZK0.251, PZ0.001).
Conclusion
Our study shows decreased ovarian reserve in HT patients than healthy controls
even in euthyroid state.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1079
EP1080
Thyroid screening in pregnancy -preliminary data from our outpatient
clinic
Patricia Palenikova, Jana Kollerova, Adriana Bednarova, Martin Kuzma &
Juraj Payer
Comenius University, Medical Faculty, 5th Department of Internal
Medicine, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Introduction
The  adverse  impact  of  overt  hypothyroidism  that  complicates  pregnancy
outcomes is well-established. In order to eliminate these complications has
long been discussion about the need for early detection of the disease of the
thyroid gland in the population of women planning pregnancy, respectively in
early pregnancy. In Slovakia, this effort resulted in the approval of screening for
thyroid diseases in pregnancy and has been enshrined in a legislative in 2009.
Obligatory in screening is examination TSH, in case of pathological range, the
patient is forwarded to endocrinologist.
Methods
we examined 60 pregnant patients in pilot study, with no history of thyroid
disease,  with  a  mean  age  of
32.7
years.  They  sent  by  gynecologists  for
pathological results of screening laboratory examinations (TSH, aTPO).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Results
We reported that patients were examined on average, in the 13th gestational week,
34 patients were diagnosed during the first trimester, 25 patients in the 2nd
trimester of pregnancy and one patient in the third trimester. A time from blood
collection by gynecologist to the endocrinology examination ranged from 1-9
weeks. Thirty-five patients were first time pregnant. TSH was in normal range
only in 18 patients, 8 patients had suppressed TSH physiologically (suppressed by
effect  of  HCG),  the  remaining
34  patients  had  hypothyroidism.  Antibody
positivity had 31 patients. FT4 values ranged from 11 to 24 pmol/l (normal range)
in 47 patients. Only 2 patients had fT4 below 11 pmol/l.
Conclusion
The results show that despite the implementation of screening for thyroid diseases
in pregnant, these patients were sent to endocrinologist relatively late. That is a
reason of late diagnosis of hypothyroidism, although it is well known that only
early treatment can prevent symptoms and complications in pregnant women and
ensure the healthy development of the child.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1080
EP1081
The efficacy of radioiodine therapy in patients with hyperfunctioning
thyroid nodules
Anna Dabrowska1, Jolanta Kijek2, Jerzy Tarach1, Anna Torun-Jurkowska3,
Beata Chrapko2 & Maria Kurowska1
1Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Medical University of Lublin,
Lublin, Poland;2Chair and Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical
University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland;3Department of Mathematics and
Medical Biostatistics, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
Introduction
Radioiodine (RAI) is used as a definitive therapy of hyperthyroidism due to toxic
adenoma (TA) as well as toxic multinodular goiter (TMG). Achievement of
hypothyroidism or euthyroidism is defined as a successful therapy.
Methods
The study was conducted in 666 patients - 484 with TA and 182 with TMG
(85.58% of women), aged 56.19G13.88 years. We analyzed retrospectively
hormonal  and  imaging  findings
(scintigraphy,  ultrasonography),  including
isotopic results in subjects treated at Department of Nuclear Medicine and
Endocrinology Department during the eight-year period. The efficacy of RAI
therapy has been assessed based on free thyroid hormones levels, measured
12 months after radioiodine administration.
Results
Mean concentrations of FT4 and FT3 and age did not differ significantly both
groups. Patients with TA had lower thyroid mass and RAI 24-h uptake than
subjects with TMG (PZ0.0000). Administered therapeutic activities of RAI
(MBq), calculated using Marinelli’s formula, were smaller in subjects with TA
(537.03G181.39 vs 614.13G147.22; PZ0.0000) and the thyroid-absorbed doses
of RAI (Gy) in such patients were greater (PZ0.0000). After RAI therapy,
hypothyroidism  was  found  in
3.30%  TA  and  8.79%  TMG  participants,
euthyreosis
- in
80.79%  TA  and  69.23%  TMG  and  hyperthyroidism  -  in
15.91% TA and 21.98% TMG. The efficacy of RAI therapy was achieved in
84.10% of TA patients (F-84.99%; M-78.87%) and in 78.02% of TMG subjects
(F-75.80%; M-92.00%). The cure of hyperthyroidism was significantly correlated
in both groups with lower: thyroid mass, RAI 24-h uptake and concentrations of
FT4 and FT3 before therapy. No significant associations between successful
therapy and patients’ age, thyroid absorbed dose and used therapeutic activity of
RAI were found.
Conclusions
RAI therapy was more effective in TA patients. Males responded better to
treatment than females in case of TMG. The cure correlated with thyroid mass,
RAI 24-h uptake and free thyroid hormones levels before therapy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1081
EP1082
Clinical and epidemiological profile of patients with hyperthyroidism
and hypothyroidism that receive endocrinological services from a
medical institution in Medellín (Colombia) between 2013 and 2015
Paula Velásquez, Felipe Osorio, Sergio Ramírez, Laura Jaramillo,
Juliana Molina, María de los Ángeles Rodríguez & Lina Martínez
Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana, Medellin, Antioquia, Colombia.
Introduction
Endocrine Illnesses have high prevalence on a global level due to multiple
etiologies that can lead alterations to this system.
Objective
Determine the epidemiological profile of hyperthyroid and hypothyroid patients
that receive endocrinological services from a medical institution in Medellin
(Colombia) between 2013 and 2015.
Methodology
A descriptive, retrospective study was conducted and included the clinical records
of patients diagnosed with hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism. A univariate
analysis was applied using descriptive statistics by means of absolute frequencies
and proportions in the SPSS software, version 19.0.
Results
A sample was obtained with 131 patients with hypothyroidism and 18 with
hyperthyroidism, the average age was 56.7G17.8 years and 55.6G15.1 years,
respectively. The frequency of female sex with hypothyroidism was greater than
those  patients  with  hyperthyroidism
(86.3%  versus
66.7%).  Post-surgery
hypothyroidism had a high prevalence (11.5%) followed by the Hashimoto
disease (5.3%). The principal etiologies in hyperthyroidism were Graves disease
(33.3%) and thyrotoxicosis (22.2%). With relation to the signs and frequent
symptoms in the studied patients, the goiter was common in 14.5% of the patients
with hypothyroidism versus 38.9% of those patients with hyperthyroidism. The
most frequent diseases on past medical history in both groups of patients were
high blood pressure and Diabetes Mellitus.
Conclusion
The results align with what is described in the literature of both pathologies, being
more common in women with primary gland disfunction. In relation to classic
symptoms of the disease such as fatigue and adynamia, neither were the most
relevant in this study.
Keywords: Thyroid Diseases, Hypothyroidism, Hyperthyroidism, Goiter
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1082
EP1083
The beneficial effect of L-thyroxine on lipid parameters in mild form of
subclinical hypothyroidism
Valentina Velkoska Nakova1, Brankica Krstevska2, Gordana Pemovska2,
Tatjana Milenkovikj2 & Olivija Vaskova3
1Clinical Hospital, Shtip, Macedonia;2University Clinic of Endocrinology,
Diabetes and Metabolic Disorders, Skopje, Macedonia;3Institute of
Patophysiology and Nuclear Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia.
Introduction
Overt  hypothyroidism  and  severe  subclinical  hypothyroidism
(ScH)  are
associated  with  dyslipidaemia,  and  its  condition  is  reversible  after  thyroid
replacement therapy. We investigated the effect of levothyroxine therapy on lipid
parameters in patients with mild form of subclinical hypothyroidism (ScH).
Material and methods
Fifty-seven patients with newly diagnosed ScH with TSH levels below 10 mU/l
and 30 age and sex-matched healthy subjects were included in the study. Lipid
parameters were evaluated at the first visit in both groups, and after 6 months
euthyroid stage in patients with ScH.
Results
Average value of TSH in patients with ScH was 8.1 mU/l. At the baseline, ScH
patients has a significantly higher total cholesterol and LDL-C levels, and lower
HDL-C, than the control group (5.6G0.9 vs. 4.8G1.1, 3.4G1.0 vs. 2.9G0.8, and
1.5G0.5 vs. 1.7G0.9, mmol/L, P!0.05, respectively). Thyroid substitution
therapy in ScH group, significantly decreased total cholesterol and LDL-C, and
increased HDL-C (5.6G0.9 vs. 5.3G1.1, 3.4G1.0 vs. 3.2G1.1, 1.5G0.5 vs.
1.6G0.5, mmol/L, P!0.05 respectively). Also, TSH positively correlated with
total cholesterol (rZ0.147, P!0.05).
Conclusion
Mild form of ScH is associated with hipercholesterolemia, which is reversible
after levothyroxine treatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1083
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP1084
Princess and the Pea
Libuse Srbova
Endokrinologicky´ ústav, Praha, Czech Republic.
Introduction
Subacute (de Quervain´) thyroiditis is an uncommon altough not a rare condition.
Pain  in  the  thyroid  and  ill-defined  hypoechogenic  thyroid  lesions  in
ultrasonography are typicall findings, occasionaly are increased thyroid hormones
levels. Often preceded by upper respiratory tract infection. The disease is self-
limited and often resolves spontaneously, usually without subsequent thyroid
function abnormalities, or it may improve with anti-inflammatory drugs and
corticosteroids. Fine needly biopsy can confirm the diagnosis in case of doubt, but
is not performed frequently.
Case report
A 32-year-old woman complained of pain in a very small area on the anterior side
of her neck. Sonographical examination revealed small hypoechogenic lesion 9!
7!8 mm[0.3 ml] in an otherwise almost normal thyroid gland corresponding with
the pain point. Within one month the pain worsened and the area sonographically
enlarged to 27!13!12 mm [2.1 ml] with features typical of subacute thyroiditis.
After  rapid  relief following  treatment  with  prednisone  the  same  problems
appeared in the opposite lobe when prednisone therapy was interrupted. In this
case the whole lobe was affected. Prednisone therapy again brought immediate
improvement. Currently the patient has no problems and sonographical findings
are completely normal.
Conclusion
This case report demonstartes an unusually small painful enough lesion caused by
subacute  thyroiditis.The  diagnosis  was  clear  only  in  the  course  of further
development of the disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1084
EP1085
Delayed diagnosis of small bowel adenocarcinoma due to thyroiditis
induced thyrotoxicosis in a healthy young adult
Tae Sun Park1,2, Kyung Ae Lee2, Yu Ji Kim2 & Hong Sun Baek1,2
1
Chonbuk National University Medical School, Jeonju, Republic of Korea;
2Chonbuk National University Hospital, Jeonju, Republic of Korea.
Objectives
Various  systemic  symptoms  may  occur  in  patients  with  thyrotoxicosis.
Gastrointestinal  manifestations  such  as  hyperphagia  or  frequent  defecation,
often coexist with other thyrotoxic symptoms. Vomiting also has been mentioned.
In this setting, systemic symptoms of underlying malignancy may be confused
with those of thyrotoxicosis leading to a delay in diagnosis.
Methods
We report a case with delayed diagnosis of small bowel adenocarcinoma due to
thyroiditis induced thyrotoxicosis in a healthy young adult.
Results
A 22-year-old man presented with palpitation, vomiting and 10 kg weight loss
over the past 1 month. About 3 months before visiting our hospital, the patient
reduced the weight about 10 kg through diet and exercise. The patient had no
proptosis, eyelid lag, the thyroid gland was not palpable, and no tenderness
or rebound tenderness was found in the epigastrium. Laboratory examinations
revealed  low  level  of  TSH,  elevated  free  T4
level,  hyponatremia  and
hypokalemia. Serum antibodies to TSH-receptor and thyroid peroxidase were
negative. Tc-99m thyroid scan was performed and uptake was decreased in both
thyroid lobe. The patient was diagnosed with thyroiditis induced thyrotoxicosis.
At the initial approach, the symptoms of patient including nausea and vomiting
were considered uncommon thyrotoxic manifestations. However, vomiting was
not improved despite symptomatic treatment. Upper gastrointestinal series and
computed tomography of abdomen revealed slow passage of contrast media and
narrowing of small bowel with upstream dilatation due to small bowel mass. He
underwent small bowel segmental resection. The pathology reported adenocarci-
noma of proximal jejunum.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this case highlights the importance of a comprehensive clinical
history and examination for all patients presenting with thyrotoxicosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1085
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Thyroid cancer
EP1086
External beam radiation therapy: a promising tool to enhance
mesenchymal stem cell migration towards tumors
Christina Schug1, Alexandra Wechselberger2, Sarah Urnauer1, Kathrin
A Schmohl1, Andrea M Muller1, Nathalie Schwenk1, Kirsten Lauber3, Peter
J Nelson2 & Christine Spitzweg1
1Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of Munich,
Munich, Germany;2Clinical Biochemistry Group, Medical Poliklinik IV,
University Hospital of Munich, Munich, Germany;3Department of
Radiation Oncology, University Hospital of Munich, Munich, Germany.
The tumor-homing property of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) has led to their
use as delivery vehicles for therapeutic genes such as the sodium iodide symporter
(NIS), which has convincingly been demonstrated by our recent studies of
systemic  NIS  gene  delivery  using  MSCs  as  delivery  vehicles  in  both
subcutaneous and orthotopic xenograft mouse models. External beam radiation
therapy (EBRT) represents a promising tool in the application of engineered MSC
(eMSCs)-based gene therapy as tumor irradiation may enhance MSC recruitment
into irradiated tumor microenvironments. This effect is presumably mediated
through a radiation-induced stimulation of secretion of certain cytokines.
Effects of EBRT on the cytokine secretion profile of human liver cancer cells
(HuH7) were investigated by ELISA on supernatants of HuH7 cells, which were
irradiated with different doses (1-10 Gy) and removed at intervals from 0-48 h
after radiation. Beside an increase in VEGF (up to 1.6-fold) and TSP-1 (up to
2-fold) secretion, a high increase in CXCL12 expression (up to 3-fold) was
observed at 48 h post radiation. 48 h supernatants were further tested in a live cell
tracking migration assay (IBIDI m-slides Chemotaxis) monitored by time-lapse
microscopy for 24 h. The analysis revealed a profound increase of mean forward
migration index (yFMI), mean center of mass (yCoM) and mean directionality of
MSCs towards supernatants from irradiated compared to non-irradiated tumor
cells implying enhanced MSC migration.
Our data demonstrate that tumor cells secrete higher levels of cytokines and
growth factors that are involved in MSC tumor homing after irradiation resulting
in stimulation of chemotaxis of MSCs towards tumor cells. This clearly shows the
promising potential of EBRT pretreatment to enhance the migratory capacity of
MSCs and thus tumor selectivity and therapeutic effectiveness of MSC-mediated
gene therapy approaches.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1086
EP1087
Comparisons of Endothelial Dysfunction, Inflammation and Insulin
Resistance in Differentiated Thyroid Cancer Patients According to
Their Radioactive Iodine Treatment Status
Mustafa Dinc1, Kamil Baskoy2, Ramazan Yildiz1, Serkan Tapan1,
Engin Alagoz1, Fatih Yesildal1, Erkan Ozturk1, Abdullah Taslipinar1,
Aydogan Aydogdu1, Salih Deveci1, Nuri Arslan1, Omer Azal1 &
Alper Sonmez1
1Gulhane Military Medicine Academy, Ankara, Kecioren, Turkey;
2Gulahen Military Medicine Academy, Haydarpasa Training Hospital,
Istanbul, Uskudar, Turkey.
Objective
Radioactive  iodine
(RAI)  treatment  has  been  reported  to  be  associated  to
increased cardiovascular events and death compared to the general population,
but the mechanism is not fully understood. Endothelial dysfunction, inflam-
mation,  and  insulin  resistance  play  important  roles  in  the  pathogenesis  of
atherosclerotic events. We aimed to compare papillary thyroid carcinoma patients
receiving levothyroxine suppression therapy after bilateral total thyroidectomy
with or without RAI treatment in terms of endothelial dysfunction, inflammation
and insulin resistance.
Materials and Methods
A total of 30 patients were included in the study (FZ23 (76.6%); ageZ38.83G
8.15
(minZ24, maxZ54)). 17 of these patients (F/MZ14/3) received RAI
ablation. In all cases, blood samples were taken before the operation. Blood
samples were taken at 3 and 6 months after RAI or thyroid surgery. All patients
with TSH !0.1 mIU/ml received levothyroxine suppression therapy. Serum
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
asymmetric dimethyl arginine (ADMA), hs-CRP and HOMA-IR measurements
were performed to demonstrate endothelial dysfunction, endothelial inflammation
and insulin resistance, respectively.
Results
RAI receiving and not-receiving groups were similar in terms of age and gender.
TSH  levels  were  significantly  lower  than  before  treatment
(P!0.001).
Preoperative ADMA, HOMA-IR and hs-CRP levels were similar to 3rd and 6th
month measurements. These parameters were similar between groups receiving
and not-receiving RAI treatment. Changes in ADMA, hs-CRP and HOMA-IR
levels were not associated with the amount of applied RAI.
Discussion
In this study, there was no significant effect of RAI ablation treatment on
endothelial dysfunction, inflammation and insulin resistance in differentiated
thyroid cancer patients. However, in order to better clarify the effects of RAI
applications on these parameters, larger scale long-term follow-up studies are
needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1087
EP1088
Benefits of anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody and anti- thyroglobulin
antibody for the prediction of differentiated thyroid cancer in
Hashimoto thyroiditis
Sevilay Akalp Ozmen1, Kenan C¸ adırcı2, Konca Altunkaynak3,
İlknur 
¸ alık1, Faruk Yıldız2, Esra Lalog˘lu4, Hakan Sevimli2, Hakan Gozc2,
Abdulmuttalip Arslan2, Yasemin Kaya5, Havva Keskin6 & Ay¸e 
¸ arlıo
˘ lu7
1Department of Pathology, Regional Education and Research Hospital,
Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Regional Education
and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;3Department of Biochemistyr,
Regional Education and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;4Department
of Biochemistyr, Ataturk University Faculty of Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey;
5
Department of Internal Medicine, Ordu University Faculty of Medicine,
Ordu, Turkey;6Department of Internal Medicine, Goztepe Regional
Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey;7Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Regional Education and Research Hospital,
Erzurum, Turkey.
Purpose
The association between differentiated thyroid cancers and autoimmune thyroid
diseases is well known. Therefore, we aimed to investigate the importance of
thyroid peroxidase antibody (anti-TPO) and thyroglobulin antibody (Anti-Tg)
in patients followed with the diagnosis of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis regarding the
development of differentiated thyroid cancer.
Methods
A total of 56 patients including 22 Hashimoto’s thyroiditis patients operated on
for nodules and with a histopathologic diagnosis of malignant differentiated
thyroid cancer (17 papillary cancer, 5 follicular cancer) and 34 individuals with
benign nodular goiter, and 35 healthy controls were included in the study. There
were no statistically significant differences among the groups in terms of age and
body mass index. Anti-thyroglobulin and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody values
within one month before surgery were taken. Association between postoperative
histopathology and antibody levels was analyzed.
Results
In patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, anti-TPO and anti-Tg were significantly
different between benign and malignant groups (9.4G1.3 and 78.6G142.7) ve
anti-Tg
(19.0G5.3  and  421.9G1061.4)  (PZ0.026,  PZ0.013,  respectively).
There was a positive correlation between anti-TPO and anti-TG in the malignant
group (PZ0.01 rZ0.386, PZ0.03 rZ0.259, respectively). In ROC analysis,
TPOR15 had 62.5% sensitivity and 100% specificity, anti TG R21 had 50%
sensitivity and 100% specificity in predicting differentiated thyroid cancer in
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
Conclusion
It appears that preoperative high anti-TPO and anti-Tg levels are a useful
indicator to predict differentiated thyroid cancers.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1088
EP1089
Malignancy in AUS/FLUS: can we create a predictive score?
Sílvia Silva, Ana Rafael, Ricardo Marques & Luís Fernandes
Hospital Egas Moniz, CHLO, Lisboa, Portugal.
Background
Thyroid AUS/FLUS lesions continue to be a grey area regarding the surgery to be
carried out. Our aim was to create a predictive malignancy score to help in
surgical decision.
Methods
Retrospective study of 2981 patients and 3557 thyroid Fine-needle aspirations
(FNAs) between January 2012 to December 2014. Ultrasound and cytological
findings considered suspicious by the ATA guidelines were analyzed. Malignant
group was compared with a control group of benign histology using SPSS
analysis.
Results
AUS/FLUS rate was 15.9% (564). 180 patients underwent surgery. 54 revealed
carcinoma on final histology.
From Q-square test we found: 1) Hypoechoic nodules (HN) and ecographic
microcalcifications (MC) are individually associated with malignancy. 2) Taller
than wide shape nodules and vascularity findings are significant but not statistic
associated. 3) Microfolicular (MF), Hurthle cells (HC) and nuclear changes (NC)
are always present in malignant cases but without individual association.
Multivariable  analyses  showed:
1)  presence  of
3 cytological  findings  was
associated with higher probability of carcinoma. 2) HN and MC are strongly
associated with malignancy.
By  logistic  regression  associating  the
5
criteria  increased  probability  of
carcinoma.  Probabilities  were  as  follows:  HN-2.6;  MC-18.69;  MF-2.48;
HC-2.02; NC-1.99. ROC curve was 72.9% above. Sensibility and specificity
were 66.2%/72.7% with a cut-off point of 0.50.
Conclusion
A moderate sensibility and a high specificity for malignancy were observed in the
association between hypoechoic nodule, ecographic microcalcifications, micro-
follicular lesions, Hurthle cells and nuclear changes. These criteria can be useful
in surgical decision contributing for a possible decrease in the reintervention rate.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1089
EP1090
Differential expression of mRNA of the vitamin D receptor,
1a-hydroxylase 25-hydroxy vitamin D and estrogen receptors in human
explants and cell cultures of thyroid cancer and normal tissues
Dalia Somjen1, Orli Sharon1, Esther Knoll1, Abraham Aizic2, David Fliss2,
Rona Limor1, Naftali Stern1 & Elena Izkhakov1
1Institute of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Hypertension, Tel-Aviv med
ctr, Israel;2Institute of Pathology, Tel-Aviv med ctr, Israel.
Several studies indicated that estrogen receptors (ERs) and vitamin D receptor
(VDR), as well 1a-hydroxylase 25-hydroxy vitamin D (1OHase) are expressed in
various normal and cancerous cell types. To date, there are no reported studies on
the different expressions of VDR, 1OHase and ERs, in human thyroid normal and
cancer  cells.  This  study  addresses  these  questions.  Tissues  harvested  from
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) and normal glands explants were used throughout
either as intact explants or as cell cultures. The relative VDR, 1OHase and ERa,
ERb, in these samples were determined by real time PCR. Both normal thyroid
and PTC explants and cultured cells expressed VDR and 1OHase mRNA as well
as ERa and ERb. Cancer thyroid explants had higher abundance than normal ones
of VDR, ERb and ERb but lower 1OHase. Cancer thyroid cultured cells had
higher abundance than normal ones of VDR, ERa and ERb but lower 1OHase.
When  cultured  normal  and  cancer  cells  where  treated  with
0.1 nM  of
1,25(OH)2D3 (1,25D) or 1nM the less calcemic vitamin D analog (JKF) or the
non calcemic analog (CB) there is increased mRNA expression in cancer cells of
ERa, ERb, VDR and 1OHase, whereas in normal cells the stimulations were to
lower extent. In conclusion thyroid cancer and normal explants as well as cultured
cells from these tissues, express mRNA for VDR and 1OHase as well as different
ERs, to different extent and are modulated by 1,25D or the vitamin D analogs.
These results are similar to those obtained with human thyroid cancer cell lines.
This might form the basis for the use of hormonal modulation of different mRNAs
for  therapy  and  affinity  drug  targeting  via  VDR,
1OHase  and/or  ERs  by
controlling their levels. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that
endogenous vitamin D and estrogens may affect thyroid cancer cell growth via
opposing pathways: cell growth acceleration via induction of ER expression, in
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
association with the induction of VDR and 1OHase to promote the synthesis of
1,25D which is known to inhibit cell proliferation via binding to VDR. This is the
first report describing direct regulation of VDR and 1OHase expression by
vitamin  D  compounds  in  primary  cultured  human  thyroid  cancer  cells.
A functional role for vitamin D system in human thyroid cancer is suggested
by the finding that the vitamin D compounds can affect ERs expression which is in
turn involved in estrogen-induced cell growth in an ER-type specific manner.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1090
EP1091
Bethesda classification is highly predictive especially for the diagnoses
of aggressive variants of papillary thyroid carcinoma
Berna Evranos1, Sefika Burcak Polat2, Husniye Baser1, Didem Ozdemir2,
Aydan Kilicarslan3, Abdussamed Yalcin4, Reyhan Ersoy2 & Bekir Cakir2
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Yildirim Beyazit University, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey;3Department of Pathology, Yildirim Beyazit University, Faculty of
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;4Department of Surgery, Yildirim Beyazit
University, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Background
Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) has proven to be the most valuable
diagnostic procedure for preoperative discrimination of benign and malignant
nodules. Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology (TBSRTC) has
standardized reporting and cytomorphological criteria in aspiration smears. In this
study, we aimed to determine malignancy rates in nodules with different cytology
results  and  diagnostic  value  of  TBSRTC  for  variants  of  papillary  thyroid
carcinoma (PTC).
Materials and Methods
A retrospective analysis of 2534 cases with 5784 thyroid nodules, who had
undergone FNAB followed by surgery, were included in this study. FNA was
performed with ultrasound guidance. Cytological diagnosis were classified as;
nondiagnostic
(ND),  benign,  atypia  of  undetermined  significance/follicular
lesions of undetermined significance (AUS/FLUS), follicular neoplasm/suspi-
cious for follicular neoplasm (FN/SFN), suspicious for malignancy (SUS) and
malignant. Histopathological diagnoses were classified into four groups; benign,
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), follicular thyroid cancer and other types of
thyroid cancer
(including medullary thyroid cancer, undifferentiated thyroid
cancer and thyroid tumors of uncertain malignant potential). Cases with PTC
were further divided in to four categories; conventional variant, follicular variant,
aggressive variants (tall cell, diffuse sclerosing and columnar variant) and other
variants (oncocytic, solid/trabecular, warthin-like variants). FNAB results were
compared with histopathological results.
Results
Malignancy rates were 6.3%, 3.2%, 20.7%, 33.3%, 74.2%, and 95.6% in the
nodules with ND, benign, AUS/FLUS, FN/SFN, suspicious for malignancy (SUS)
and  malignant  cytologies  results,  respectively.  Preoperative  cytology  was
malignant or SUS in 56.6% of classical, 24.3% of follicular, 92% of aggressive
and 41.7% of other variants of histopathologically confirmed PTC. The difference
between the groups was significant (P!0.001).
Conclusion
Bethesda classification seems to be very effective in predicting the malignancy for
the nodules diagnosed with aggressive variant PTC on the final histological
examination.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1091
EP1092
Strain ultrasound elastography in the diagnostic evaluation of thyroid
nodules
Mira Siderova1, Kiril Hristozov1 & Ivan Krasnaliev2
1University Hospital St. Marina, Clinic of Endocrinology, Varna, Bulgaria;
2Department of Pathology, University Hospital St. Marina, Varna, Bulgaria.
Objectives
The aim of the study was to determine different types of thyroid nodules
according to their elasticity and to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of strain
elastography in detection of thyroid cancer. 114 thyroid nodules in 84 patients
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
were examined prospectively with conventional B-mode US, color Doppler,
strain elastography (SE) and fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB). 72 nodules in
50 patients were submitted to surgery and histologically assessed. For final
diagnosis we accepted histology in operated cases and cytology for the rest.
Results
After performing SE, the image was matched to a modified 5 scale scoring
system, based on the one of Ueno and Ito. 32.9% of benign and 0% of malignant
nodules presented with highly elastic structure - score 1 (P!0.0001). Elasticity in
a large area of the nodule (score 2) was present in 34.2% of benign and 5.3% of
malignant nodules (PZ0.0005). Indeterminate elasticity (score 3) had 26.3% of
benign and 18.4% of malignant lesions (PZ0.4839). No elasticity (score 4) was
determined in 6.6% of benign and in 55.3% of malignant nodules (P!0.0001).
Stiffness in nodule and surrounding tissue (score 5) was registered in 21.1% of
malignant and none of benign lesions (P!0.0001). Sensitivity, specificity, PPV,
NPV and accuracy were 76.3%; 93.4%; 85.3%; 88.8%; 87.7% for SE; 89.5%;
86.2; 79.1%; 94.4%; 89% for combining B-mode and SE; and 92.1%; 93.4%,
87.5%; 95.9%; 93% for combining B-mode, SE and FNAB, respectively.
Conclusions
The high specificity and NPP of SE alone or as an adjunct to conventional US
suggests that high elasticity is a promising criterion for excluding malignancy and
that  this  non-invasive  technique  may  limit  the  indications  for  FNAB.
Combination  of  three  methods
(B-mode,  SE  and  FNAB)  has  the  highest
diagnostic accuracy in differentiating malignant from benign nodules and permits
the clinician exact selection of patients who would benefit from surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1092
EP1093
Usefulness of Day 5 sampling in thyroid cancer patients for radioactive
iodine therapy with recombinant human thyrotropin
Seo Young Sohn1, Eun Kyung Lee2, You Jin Lee2, Yul Hwangbo2,
Hae Jin Jun2, Dae Yoon Park2, Ji Hyun Kim2 & Junsun Ryu2
1Seonam University, Myongji Hospital, Goyang, Republic of Korea;
2National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
Background
We evaluated the impact of several anthropometric parameters on serum peak
TSH levels after standard two-dose of recombinant human thyrotropin (rhTSH)
injection and assessed the usefulness of repeated measurement of TSH and
thyroglobulin (Tg) levels at 24 and 72 h after rhTSH injection (Day 3 and 5) to
confirm stimulated Tg level.
Methods
We retrospectively reviewed 270 differentiated thyroid carcinoma patients who
underwent rhTSH stimulation for radioactive iodine therapy in our clinic between
2013 and 2014. Serum TSH and Tg level were measured twice Day 3 and 5 after
rhTSH  injection.  Univariate  and  multivariate  analyses  were  performed  to
elucidate predictive factors of the peak TSH level. The repetitive values of
TSH, Tg and TgAb were compared by two-tailed paired T-test.
Results
By univariate analysis, peak TSH level (Day 3 TSH) was positively correlated
with age and serum creatinine, and negatively correlated with weight, height,
body surface area (BSA) and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (P!0.01). GFR and
BSA were independently associated with peak TSH level by multivariate analysis
(standardized b coefficient ZK0.36; P!0.001 and K0.23; P!0.01, respect-
ively). On the subgroup analysis of sixty patients with repetitive measurements,
rhTSH-stimulated Tg level on Day 5 was significantly higher than that of Day 3
(0.71 ng/ml vs. 0.54 ng/ml, PZ0.006).
Conclusions
Body size and renal function influence serum peak TSH levels after rhTSH
injection. On this basis, more personalized rhTSH dosage could be used in clinical
practice, adjusted for BSA and GFR. The repeated measurement on Day 5 seemed
to be necessary to assess stimulated Tg level.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1093
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1094
Thyroid nodule ultrasound: which indication for FNA? a prospective
study
Fabrizio Riganti1, Nadia Bonelli1, Ruth Rossetto1, Donatella Pacchioni2,
Laura Viberti3, Mauro Maccario1, Ezio Ghigo1 & Roberto Garberoglio4,1
1Endocrinology Division, A.O. Città della Salute e della Scienza, Ospedale
Molinette, Torino, Italy;2Pathology Division, A.O. Città della Salute e della
Scienza, Ospedale Molinette, Torino, Italy;3Pathology Unit, Sedes
Sapientiae Hospital, Torino, Italy;4Thyroid Disease Centre, Sedes
Sapientiae Hospital, Torino, Italy.
Introduction
Thyroid nodules are discovered by ultrasound (US) in a large percentage of
population. In most cases they are benign and asymptomatic. When to perform or
not a fine-needle-aspiration (FNA) is still matter of debate. Aim of this study was
to evaluate the usefulness of a easy-to-use US classification, based on three
US classes.
Methods
We prospectively evaluated US features of 1118 thyroid nodules, allocating each
nodule in one of three classes, depending on the number of US findings of
malignancy: US1 (0-1 finding), US2 (2 findings), US3 (3 or more findings). US
evaluation  was  made  using  traditional  B-Mode  and  Power-Doppler  high-
frequency US. We considered the following five US features as finding of
malignancy: hypoechogenicity, micro(macro)calcifications, irregular margins,
taller-than-wide shape, and intranodular chaotic vascularisation. All nodules
were then submitted to FNA, and cytological results were compared to US
classification.
Results
Excluding 106 nodules with non diagnostic cytology (Thy1) and 3 nodules with
non-thyroidal cytological diagnosis (parathyroid gland or epidermoid cyst), in the
remaining 1009 nodules FNA provided the following results:
US1: Thy2Z563, Thy3Z39, Thy4Z2, Thy5Z0
US2: Thy2Z182, Thy3Z90, Thy4Z6, Thy5Z3
US3: Thy2Z27, Thy3Z47, Thy4Z20, Thy5Z30
The distribution of FNA results showed a significant correlation (rZ0.597) with
US  classification.  Considering  thyroid  nodules  with  indeterminate  cytology
(Thy3), 111 nodules were submitted to thyroidectomy. In this subgroup of
patients,  the  histological  result
(benign  or  malignant)  showed  a  significant
difference among the three US classes, according to US stratification of suspicion.
Conclusion
Our data confirm the accuracy of traditional US findings in the first diagnostic
evaluation of thyroid nodules, proposing a simple, easy-to-use US classification
of thyroid nodules. Together with clinical features, this classification might be
useful when we have to decide if performing or not a FNA.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1094
EP1095
Clinical usefulness of dynamic risk stratification in medullary thyroid
cancer
Ji Min Han1, Hyemi Kwon2, Won Gu Kim2, Min Ji Jeon2, Tae Yong Kim2,
Won Bae Kim2 & Young Kee Shong2
1Samsung Changwon Hospital, Changwon, Republic of Korea;2Asan
Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Purpose
To detect persistent/recurrent disease of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC)
after initial surgery is important. The Tumor-Node-Metastasis (TNM) staging
system is useful for predicting disease-specific mortality, but it is static and does
not include postoperative serum calcitonin levels. We focused on the clinical
usefulness of dynamic risk stratification (DRS) using the best response to initial
therapy in patients with MTC.
Methods
A total of 120 MTC patients were classified into 3 DRS groups based on the
response to initial therapy. The clinical outcomes were assessed according to the
TNM staging and DRS.
Results
In DRS, 70%, 23%, and 7% of patients were classified into excellent, biochemical
incomplete, and structural incomplete response group. In TNM staging, 37%,
16%, 13%, and 35% of patients were stage I, II, II, and IV, respectively. There
were significant differences in survivals according to the TNM staging (PZ0.03)
and the DRS groups (PZ0.005). During median 6.2 years of follow-up, 75
patients (63%) were no evidence of disease (NED). About 60% and 17% of
patients in stage III and IV were NED, respectively. DRS could predict NED
better than TNM staging according to PVE (49.1% vs. 28.7%, respectively).
At final follow-up, 88%, 4%, and 0% attained NED in excellent, biochemical
incomplete, and structural incomplete response group, respectively.
Conclusions
DRS based on the best response to the initial therapy could provide useful
prognostic information in addition to initial TNM staging for prediction of
mortality, as well as the likelihood of NED in patients with MTC.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1095
EP1096
Sitagliptin use and thyroid cancer risk in patients with type 2 diabetes
Chin-Hsiao Tseng1,2
1Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan;2Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.
Background
Whether sitagliptin use in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus may affect the
risk of thyroid cancer requires further investigated.
Methods
The reimbursement database of the National Health Insurance in Taiwan was
used. Patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus within 1999-2008
were recruited and followed for at least 6 months for thyroid cancer until
December 31, 2011. Patients were divided into those who were newly treated with
sitagliptin
(nZ50045, “ever users of sitagliptin”) or other antidiabetic drugs
(nZ277100, “never users of sitagliptin”). The treatment effect of sitagliptin (for
ever versus never users, and for tertiles of cumulative duration of therapy) was
estimated  by  Cox  regression  incorporated  with  the  inverse  probability  of
treatment weighting using propensity score.
Results
The respective numbers of incident thyroid cancer in ever users and never users
were 25 (0.05%) and 152 (0.05%), with respective incidences of 30.34 and 22.04
per 100 000 person-years. The overall hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals)
suggested a significantly higher risk (1.573 (1.025, 2.414)). In tertile analyses, the
hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals) for the first (!6.53 months), second
(6.53-14.00 months) and third (O14 months) tertile of cumulative duration were
2.098
(1.025, 4.295), 2.476 (1.368, 4.483) and 0.689 (0.283, 1.682), respectively.
Sensitivity analyses after excluding patients with benign thyroid disease at
baseline showed similar results.
Conclusions
Sitagliptin use is associated with an increased risk of thyroid cancer, especially
during the first year of its treatment. The increased risk within a short-term of
cumulative duration of exposure probably precludes a mechanism involving de
novo development of thyroid cancer. Future studies are required to confirm the
findings of the present study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1096
EP1097
Immunohistochemistry as alternative to DNA sequencing in detection of
BRAF V600E mutation in papillary thyroid carcinomas
Miguel Paja1,2, Jose L Del Cura1,2, Maite Pérez de Ciriza1, Amelia Oleaga1
& Aitziber Ugalde1
1University Hospital Basurto, Bilbao, Basque Country, Spain;2Basque
Country University, Bilbao, Basque Country, Spain.
Objective
To compare the results of immunohistochemistry (IHC) and DNA sequencing in
detection of BRAF V600E mutation in papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC).
BRAF V600E mutation is the most common genetic alteration in papillary thyroid
carcinomas and is associated with worse prognosis. Direct sequencing is usually
performed, but less expensive immunohistochemistry can be used instead.
Methods
Study was performed in 54 consecutive PTCs during 2014-2015[A1]. DNA was
extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues by manual-microdissec-
tion and BRAF mutation was detected by allele specific PCR with Cobasw 4800
BRAF V600 mutation test (Roche). IHC was performed over tissue fixed for 24-h
with
10%  neutral  formalin  using  the  anti-BRAF  V600E
(VE-1)  mouse
monoclonal  primary  antibody.  IHC  was  scored  as  positive  or  negative  at
pathologist’s criteria.
Results
IHC BRAF V600E was positive in 32 PTC and negative in 22. Mutated PTC
appeared in older patients (mean: 53.2 vs 50.8 y-o). There were 18 positive
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
tumors by IHC with multifocality (56.2%) whereas only 7 of 22 (31.8%) with
negative IHC had two or more foci. Negative IHC PTCs were bigger than positive
ones (17.3 vs 12.8 mm). Half of positive IHC cases were classic variants of PTC,
but only one in negative IHC neoplasms. Of the 32 cases that were IHC positive
for BRAF V600E, 31 were confirmed by sequencing (96.9%) and one case was
discordant. Discordance appeared in a 38 year-old woman with an incidental PTC
follicular variant of 5 mm, near to a follicular adenoma with suspicious FNA.
Pathologist confirmed that tissue had been taken from the tumor.
Conclusions
IHC has an accuracy of 96.9% for BRAF V600E detection and can be used as a
cost-effective alternative to DNA sequencing in daily practice.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1097
EP1098
Sequence defined cMET/HGFR-targeted polymers as gene delivery
vehicles for the theranostic sodium iodide symporter (NIS) gene
Sarah Urnauer1, Stephan Morys2, Ana Krhac Levacic2, Andrea M Muller1,
Christina Schug1, Kathrin A Schmohl1, Nathalie Schwenk1,
Christian Zach2, Janette Carlsen3, Peter Bartenstein3, Ernst Wagner2 &
Christine Spitzweg1
1Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of Munich,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany;2Department of
Pharmacy, Center of Drug Research, Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany;3Department of
Nuclear Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
The sodium iodide symporter (NIS) in its role as well characterized reporter and
therapy gene represents an outstanding tool to target different cancer types
allowing non-invasive imaging of functional NIS expression by123I-scintigraphy
and therapeutic application of131I. Based on its overexpression on the surface of
the vast majority of cancer types, the cMET/Hepatocyte growth factor receptor
(HGFR) serves as an ideal target for tumor-selective gene delivery.
In the current study, we used sequence defined polymers as non-viral gene
delivery vehicles comprising polyethylene glycol (PEG) and cationic (oligoetha-
noamino) amide cores coupled with a cMET-binding-peptide (cMBP2) to target
the cMET/HGF-receptor in a human hepatocellular cancer (HuH7) mouse model.
These polymers were complexed with human NIS-DNA (polyplexes) and tested
for receptor-specificity, transduction efficiency and therapeutic efficacy.
In vitro iodide uptake studies demonstrated high transduction efficiency and
cMET-specificity  of  NIS  encoding  DNA  polyplexes  coupled  with  cMBP2
(cMBP2-PEG-Stp/NIS)  compared  to  polyplexes  without  ligand
(Ala-PEG-
Stp/NIS)  and  polyplexes  containing  non-coding  DNA
(cMBP2-PEG-Stp/
Antisense-NIS). Tumor recruitment and vector biodistribution were investigated
in vivo showing high tumor-selective iodide accumulation in cMBP2-PEG-
Stp/NIS-treated mice (6.6G1.6% ID/g123I, biological half-life 3 h) by123I-
scintigraphy
48 h after intravenous polyplex application, while injection of
control vectors did not result in specific iodide uptake. Therapy studies with 3
cycles of polyplexes and131I applications resulted in a significant delay in tumor
growth and prolonged survival of cMBP2-PEG-Stp/NIS-treated mice.
In conclusion, our data demonstrate the enormous potential of cMET-targeted
sequence defined polymers combined with the unique theranostic function of NIS
allowing for optimized transfection efficiency while eliminating adverse effects as
toxicity or high immunogenicity.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1098
EP1099
Are there any differences between demographic characteristics,
preoperative ultrasonographic findings, and cytological results of
patients with thyroid tumors of uncertain malignant potential and
papillary thyroid carcinoma of classical and non-encapsulated follicular
variants?
Husniye Baser1, Oya Topaloglu2, Abbas Ali Tam2, Afra Alkan3,
Aydan Kilicarslan4, Reyhan Ersoy2 & Bekir Cakir2
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey;3Department of Biostatistics, Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty
of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;4Department of Pathology, Yildirim Beyazit
University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Introduction
Thyroid tumors of uncertain malignant potential (TT-UMP) has been accepted as
a subgroup of follicular-patterned  thyroid tumors for  which benignancy or
malignancy cannot be assessed exactly. We aimed to evaluate demographic
characteristics, ultrasound (US) findings, and cytological results of patients with
TT-UMP and compare these findings with the classical variant of papillary
thyroid carcinoma (CV-PTC) and non-encapsulated follicular variant of PTC
(NEFV-PTC) patients, and also to evaluate the immunohistochemical charac-
teristics of patients with TT-UMP.
Methods
Twenty-four patients with TT-UMP, 672 with CV-PTC, and 132 with NEFV-PTC
were included to the study.
Results
Mean  longitudinal  nodule  size  and  median  nodule  volume  were  higher  in
TT-UMP group compared to CV-PTC and NEFV-PTC groups (P!0.001 and
P!0.001 for CV-PTC; P!0.001 and PZ0.008 for NEFV-PTC). Presence of
halo and peripheral vascularization were observed more frequently in TT-UMP
group  compared  to  CV-PTC  group
(PZ0.002
and  PZ0.024).  Nodule
localization, texture, echogenicity, presence of microcalcification, and presence
of macrocalcification were similar in TT-UMP and CV-PTC groups. US findings
and  cytological  results  were  similar  in  TT-UMP  and  NEFV-PTC  groups
(all, PO0.05). Benign and follicular neoplasm/suspicious for follicular neoplasm
cytological results were higher in TT-UMP group compared to CV-PTC group
(PZ0.030 and PZ0.001). Median tumor size was higher in TT-UMP group than
CV-PTC and NEFV-PTC groups (25 mm vs 6 mm, P!0.001 and 25 mm vs
14.4 mm, PZ0.006, respectively). In TT-UMP group, positive expression of
HBME-1, CK-19 and Gal-3 was found as 50%, 33.3%, and 25%, respectively.
Conclusion
This study demonstrated that patients with TT- UMP had higher nodule and tumor
size compared to CV-PTC and NEFV-PTC patients. Moreover, we found that US
features  and  cytological  results  were  similar  in  NEFV-PTC  and  TT-UMP
patients.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1099
EP1100
Comparison of the late effects of ablation therapy with single and
fractionated dose of radioiodine in patients with differentiated thyroid
carcinoma
Kosma Wolinski1, Rafal Czepczynski1, Adam Stangierski1,
Maciej Trojanowski2, Magdalena Rewaj-Losyk1, Katarzyna Ziemnicka1,
Maciej Be˛czyk1, Agnieszka Dyzmann-Sroka2 & Marek Ruchala1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland;2Greater Poland Center of Oncology,
Poznan, Poland.
Introduction
According to a limited number of specialized hospital beds for radioiodine
therapy in some countries, fractionated dose of radioiodine may be considered as
the ablation therapy of differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC). Aim of the study was
to compare the late effects of ablation therapy with single and fractionated dose of
radioiodine in patients with DTC.
Patients and metods
Patients with DTC treated with one (131)I dose of 2.2 GBq or fractionated dose
(1.1C1.1 GBq administered in 24-hour intervals) 5-16 weeks after thyroid-
ectomy were retrospectively included.
Results
83 patients treated with single dose and 186 treated with fractionated dose of
radioiodine were included. There were no significant differences between the
groups in male to female ratio, age at the time of the first (131)I administration,
proportion of papillary thyroid cancers (PO0.05). Also the mean duration of
follow-up did not differ significantly (8.0 vs. 7.8 years respectively, PZ0.68).
There were no significant differences including the course and outcomes of the
treatment between the patients treated initially with single and fractionated dose
of radioiodine. Cumulated doses were 7.5 vs. 7.0 GBq, second dose of radioiodine
was administered in 55.4% and 54.8% of patients, mean number of (131)I
administrations during the time of follow-up was 2.0 vs. 2.2 respectively. The
overall survival (OS) did not differ significantly between the groups-five years OS
was 98.6% for patients treated with single and 99.5% with fractionated dose of
131-I, 10 years - 98.6 and 97.1% respectively.
Conclusions
The outcomes of treatment, expressed by percentage of patients needing second
administration of radioiodine, mean number of administrations, cumulative dose
of (131)I and probability of overall survival did not differ significantly. Treatment
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
with fractionated doses
(1.1C1.1 GBq) of (131)I  administered  in 24 hour
intervals can be considered as equivalent alternative to the treatment with single
dose of 2.2 GBq.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1100
EP1101
Papillary thyroid carcinoma in a thyroglossal duct Cyst (TDC) without
a thyroid primary
Zeynep Canturk, Fatma Tugba Catan, Berrin Cetinarslan, Ilhan Tarkun,
Alev Selek & Ozlem Zeynep Akyay
Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey.
Introduction
Thyroglossal duct cyst (TDC) is a developmental abnormality of the thyroid
gland. Malignancy arising from this duct is very rare. Due to embryological
remnants of thyroid tissue located in the TDC, all malignant tumors which
develop in the thyroid gland may also develop in the TDC. In case of malignancy,
the most probable diagnosis is papillary thyroid carcinoma.
Case report
We present a 27-year-old female patient complaining of a midline neck mass.
Ultrasonography revealed cystic lesion of 32!26 mm includes solid zone with
the calcifications approximately 15 mm at the midline neck and a 4.5 mm cystic
nodule at the right lobe of thyroid gland. Fine needle aspiration biopsy was
nondiagnostic. She was operated and histopathologically diagnosed as papillary
thyroid carcinoma arising from the thyroglossal canal. With the suspicion of
metastasis of the primary thyroid papillary carcinoma total thyroidectomy and
central lymph node dissection were performed. Histopathological evaluation
revealed colloid goiter and reactive lymph nodes as benign cytology. There was
no  residual  thyroid  tissue  or  any  lymph  nodes  on  post-operative  neck
ultrasonography. Postoperative serum thyroglobulin level was 9.9 ng/ml and
anti-thyroglobulin  was  negative  when  TSH  level  was  high
(O100  mIU/l).
Radioactive iodine ablation treatment was planned.
Conclusion
Ectopic papillary thyroid carcinoma may also develop in the TDC due to
embryological remnants of thyroid tissue located in the TDC. Therefore the
clinician should have a high index of suspicion upon encountering papillary
thyroid  carcinoma  of  the  TDC  to  differentiate  de  novo  papillary  thyroid
carcinoma in the TDC from those originating from the thyroid gland.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1101
EP1102
Management and transcendence of incidental thyroid 18FDG-PET
focal uptake (PEToma)
Anna Casteras Roman, Carles Zafon Liopis, Amparo García Burillo, Diego
Villasboas Rosciolesi, Maite Salcedo Pujanell, Jaime Monturiol Duran,
Joan Castell Conesa & Jordi Mesa Manteca
Vall Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction
Incidental focal uptake in the thyroid gland is detected in 1%-2% of 18FDG-PET
examinations. FNA is recommended due to an increased risk of malignancy
(25-50%), but these figures are extracted from the studied cases (about a half).
Moreover there is controversy about the maximum standardized uptake value
(Suvmax) ability to discriminate between benign or malignant nodules.
Methods
We retrospectively reviewed 4207 FDG-PET scans performed for non-thyroidal
reasons from January 2013 to October 2014 at our institution. Patients with focal
thyroid uptake were assessed for age, sex, underlying conditions, Suvmax, TSH,
Ultrasound, FNA cytology and pathological findings.
Results
65 cases (1.54% of PETs) showed focal thyroid uptake, 41 (63%) females, median
age (SD) 70 (12) years. Median (SD) SUVmax was 7.4 (6), [1.4-32]. In global 49
patients (75.4%) were found to have cancer, most common lung cancer and
lymphoma,  and  currently
19
patients
(29.2%)  have  died.  Ultrasound  was
performed in 36 patients (55.4%): single nodule 16, multinodular 19, normal 1;
mean nodular size 16.6 (9.6) mm; in 9 cases the nodule was suspictious. Twenty-
five cases (38.5%) underwent FNA. Bethesda score was I: 6 (24%); II: 10 (40%);
III: 1 (4%); IV: 3 (12%); V: 1 (4%); VI: 4 (16%). Seven patients were operated on,
5 were thyroid cancer (papillary 4, anaplasic 1). Higher SUVmax values prompted
FNA exam (P 0.01), however any relation was found between SUVmax  and
cytology (P 0.44) nor nodular size (P 0.07). There was a direct correlation
between TSH levels and SUVmax  (P!0.001), but disappeared when analizing
euthyroidal patients (TSH 0.5-4.5, n 53) P 0.9.
Conclusions
We report similar frequencies and clinical workup of thyroid PEToma compared
to previous series. Few cases underwent thyroidectomy, however thyroid cancer
was  a  frequent  histological  finding.  SUVmax  could  not  determine  risk  of
malignancy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1102
EP1103
The association between Nlo and Mhr in differentiated thyroid cancer
Kenan 
¸ adırcı1, Faruk Yıldız1, Havva Keskin2, Hilal Kızıltun
¸3,
¸ enay Durmaz4 & Ay¸e 
¸ arlıo
˘ lu1
1Department of Internal Medicine, Training and Research Hospital,
Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Medeniyet University,
Istanbul, Turkey;3Department of Radiation Oncology, Ataturk University,
Erzurum, Turkey;4Department of Internal Medicine, Kırıkkale University,
Kırıkkale, Turkey.
Purpose
Papillary and follicular cancers are classified as differentiated thyroid cancers.
Recently, it has been revealed that Neutrophile/lymphocyte ratio (NLO) and the
ratio of monocyte/lipoprotein cholesterol with high density (MHR) are the strong
indicators of oxidative stress and systemic inflammation. In this study, we intend
the evaluation of all these indicators in our patients diagnosed with differentiated
thyroid cancers.
Method
This study included
182 persons which 107 of them were diagnosed with
differentiated thyroid cancer in our clinic and 75 of them who were healthy and no
significantly different in regard to age and body mass index (BMI) statically were
in the control group. The mean age of patients was 45.9G14.7 years and the mean
age of control group was 48.2G7.7 years. There was no a significant difference
statistically between them (PZ0.1). The BMI mean of the patients was calculated
as 28.0G4.7 kg/kg/m2 and the BMI mean of the control group was calculated
27.2G3.3 kg/kg/m2. It was not detected a significant difference between them
statistically (PZ0.5). Cholesterol and hematologic parameters of the patients and
the control group after 12 hours fasting were evaluated after studied.
Result
It was detected a significant difference statically between the patients and the
control group respectively in NLO mean (3.2G2.8 and 2.4G1.3 PZ0.013),
MHR ratio (0.038G0.05 and 0.1G0.07 PZ0.000) as the result of the study. In
the correlation analysis, there was a positive correlation respectively MHR and
Neutrophile(rZ0.4 PZ0.000), lymphocyte (rZ0.4 PZ0.000) and thyroglobu-
line (rZ0.4 PZ0.000), and it was determined a negative correlation between
NLO and respectively lymphocyte (rZK0.2 PZ0.000), monocyte (rZK0.18
PZ0.01).
Discussion
It was observed that differentiated thyroid cancers increase systemic inflammation
based on the data provided by this study.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1103
EP1104
Thyroid cancer in hyperthyroid patients treated by surgery
A L Domingues1, E Rodrigues2,3, A Saavedra2,3, L Matos Lima2 &
D Carvalho2,3
1Faculty Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;2Centro Hospitalar
S Joao, Porto, Portugal;3Instituto de Investiga
¸ão e Inovaça˜o da Saude,
Porto University, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction
The association of hyperthyroidism and thyroid cancer (TC) is controversial with
prevalences in the literature varying from 1.6 to 32.8%. The aim of this work was
to evaluate the prevalence of TC in hyperthyroid patients submitted to surgery and
to find differences between the tumors according to the type of hyperthyroidism.
Material and methods
retrospective  study  to  evaluate  clinical  and  histopathological  data  of  all
hyperthyroid patients older than 18 years that underwent thyroid surgery between
2005 and 2015 at our Hospital. Statistics was done with SPSS 22.0 for windows.
Results
In this period 413 hyperthyroid patients were submitted to surgery, 347 females
and
66  males,
108
(26.2%)  with  Graves  Disease
(GD),
263(63.7%)  with
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Multinodular Toxic Goiter (MNTG) and 42 (10.2%) with Toxic Adenoma (TA).
Concerning sex distribution there was no statistical difference between the 3
groups. The mean age in GD was significantly lower than in TMNG (43.9G13.2
vs 58G13.9 years) and in TA (43.9G13.2 vs 50.5G16.2 years). Histologic
examination revealed TC in 89 patients (21.5%) with mean diameter of the
tumors of 0.88 cm (0.1-6.5 cm). The majority of the tumors were incidental
findings (82%). Concerning the type of surgery performed, total thyroidectomy
was more frequent in GD and TMNG compared to TA (97.2% and 94.7%
respectively vs 21.4%).The prevalence of TC was 25.1% for TMNG, 16.7% for
GD and 11.9% for TA. Histopathology examination revealed Papillary thyroid
cancer in the majority of cancer patients, 16/18 (88.9%) in GD, 60/66 (90.9%) in
TMNG and 4/5 (80%) in TA. There were no significant differences in tumor size,
incidental finding, presence of thyroiditis, extrathyroidal extension, lymphovas-
cular invasion and ganglionar metastasis between the 3 groups.
Conclusion
In our series we found a high prevalence of TC in hyperthyroid patients (21.5%),
higher than the majority of the series in the previous literature.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1104
EP1105
The increased coexistence of autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT) in children
and adolescents with thyroid carcinoma (TC) in years 2001-2015
compared to years 1996-2000
Marek Niedziela1,6, Maciej Flader1,6, Jerzy Harasymczuk2,
Ewa Trejster3, Danuta Breborowicz4, Barbara Rabska-Pietrzak1,5,
Pawel Kurzawa3,5 & Jan Breborowicz4
1Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Rheumatology, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland;2Chair and Department of
Pediatric Surgery, Traumatology and Urology, Poznan University of Mecal
Sciences, Poznan, Poland;3Division of Pathomorphology, Karol Jonscher’s
Clinical Hospital, Poznan, Poland;4Department of Tumor Pathology,
Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Poznan, Poland;5Chair and Department of
Tumor Pathology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland;
6Karol Jonscher’s Clinical Hospital, Poznan, Poland.
Introduction
In years 1996-2000, the predominance of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC)
(70.3%) compared to follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC; 27.0%) and medullary
thyroid carcinoma (MTC; 2.7%) was observed in our region. AIT coexisted in
1 PTC (2.7% of all cancers and 3.8% in PTC group).
Aim
The aim of retrospective study was to analyze the coexistence of AIT and TC in
years 2001-2015 in relation to years 1996-2000.
Material and methods
Patients  aged
!18 years with the histopathological diagnosis of TC were
analyzed. AIT was confirmed by the presence of antithyroid antibodies in serum
or based on cytological result obtained from biopsy.
Results
47 TCs were confirmed in 2001-2015 (41 PTC, 1 FTC and 5 MTC) in 37 girls
(78.7%) and 10 boys (22.3%). AIT coexisted only with PTC, in 4/13 (30.7%)
2001-2005, in 2/8 (25.0%) 2006-2010 and in 11/20 (55.0%) 2010-2015. The
incidence of PTC/AIT coexistence in 2001-2015 was 41.4% (17/41), i.e. 10-fold
more frequent than in 1996-2000.
Conclusions
High risk of the coexistence of PTC and AIT in years 2001-2015 suggests that the
careful follow-up of patients with AIT is mandatory.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1105
EP1106
Biochemical effects of levothyroxine withdrawal in patients with
differentiated thyroid cancer
Georgios Papadakis1, Styliani Kalaitzidou1, Eleni Triantafillou1,
Kassiani Kakava2, Aspasia Drosou1, Aggeliki Sapera1, Nikolaos Dogkas3,
Theodora Pappa1, Victoria Kaltzidou1, Vassiliki Villiotou3 &
Athanasia Tertipi1
1Department of Endocrinology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus,
Athens, Greece;2Department of Otolaryngology, Metaxa Anticancer
Hospital, Pireaus, Athens, Greece;3Department of Biochemistry, Metaxa
Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus, Athens, Greece.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Background
Many patients with differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) are treated with radiodine
(I-131) after thyroidectomy, while they are hypothyroid and all are submitted to
withdrawal of LT4 periodically for the evaluation of their disease. Among the
tests used for follow-up is serum thyroglobulin (Tg) as a tumor marker, and
occasionally,  total  body  scan  with  I-131.  Maximal  sensitivity  of  the
aforementioned tests is established in the hypothyroid state, under elevated
thyrotropin (TSH) concentrations, achieved with LT4 withdrawal. The aim of our
study was to determine the degree of change in several biochemical parameters
due to a short-term but acutely supervening hypothyroidism.
Patients and methods
A total of 345 patients, 60 males (17%) and 285 (83%) females, with a history of
DTC were enrolled in the study. Their mean age (GS.D.) was 54.7G13.6 years
(rangeZ17-83 years). Their biochemical profile and serum free triiodothyronine
(FT3), free thyroxine (FT4) and thyrotropin (TSH) levels were measured during
withdrawal of LT4 treatment, and several months after restarting LT4.
Results
During withdrawal, the intra-individual percentage increase in total cholesterol,
low density lipoprotein-cholesterol, very low density lipoprotein-cholesterol and
triglycerides was of the order of 60-80% and that for high density lipoprotein-
cholesterol
30%.  Creatinine  increased  by
30%,  whereas  Na  and  K  levels
decreased  by
1%.  The  increase  for  creatine  phosphate  kinase  was  around
200-300%, for aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase 50-80%,
for g-glutamyl transpeptidase 10-20%, and for lactate dehydrogenase 25%.
Glucose decreased by 1-4%.
Conclusion
Acute, short- term hypothyroidism has significant impact on many biochemical
parameters,  reflecting  the  relative  alterations  in  many  organ  functions  and
metabolic pathways. Patients with borderline biochemical parameters, such as
creatinine, electrolytes or aminotransferases during euthyroidism, may show
significant deterioration of these parameters during hypothyroidism. The presence
of other diseases should be considered before submitting these patients to LT4
withdrawal.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1106
EP1107
Baicalein induces cell apoptosis via the MAPK pathway in FRO
anaplastic thyroid cancer cells
EunSook Kim, SeEun Han, IlSung Nam-Goong & YoungIl Kim
Department of Medicine, Ulsan University Hospital, College of Medicine
University of Ulsan, Ulsan, Republic of Korea.
Baicalein induces cell apoptosis via the MAPK pathway in FRO anaplastic
thyroid cancer cells.
Anaplastic thyroid cancer is one of the most aggressive forms of malignancies
which grow very rapidly. Although several conventional medications have been
applied for the treatment of anaplastic thyroid cancer, but current therapies still
rather limited and novel therapeutic strategies are required. Baicalein is a flavone,
a type of flavonoid, originally isolated from the roots of Scutellaria baicaiensis
and  S.  lateriflora,  and  is  known  various  biological  properties  such  as
antiinflammation, antioxidation, neuroprotection, antiallergy, and anticancer etc.
In this present study, we aimed to investigate the potential effects of baicalein on
FRO anaplastic thyroid cancer cells and the underlying mechanisms through
which baicalein exerts its action.
Cell viability assay was indicated that baicalein potently suppressed the cell
growth in a time- and dose-dependent manner. We also found that baicalein can
induce the expression of apoptotic proteins, Bax, cleaved caspase-3, PARP, and
Cox-2 and the phosphorylation of ERK, JNK, and p38 MAPK in a dose-
dependent  manner.  Moreover,  baicalein  decreased  the  expression  levels  of
E-cadherin and N-cadherin in FRO cells.
In conclusion, these findings suggested that baicalein can induce apoptosis in
anaplastic thyroid cancer cells through inhibition of the MAPK pathway.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1107
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1108
Ultrasonographical, clinical and histopathological features of 1264
nodules with papillary thyroid carcinoma and microcarcinoma based
on tumor size
Neslihan Cuhaci1, Husniye Baser2, Oya Topaloglu1, Didem Ozdemir1,
Aydan Kilicarslan3, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey;2Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey;3Department of Pathology, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
In recent years, due to the improvements in ultrasonography (US), it has become
possible to gain more information about the papillary throid carcinoma (PTC) and
papillary tyroid microcarcinoma (PTMC). However, whether PTC and PTMC
exhibit  the  same  ultrasonographic  features  and  behave  same  features  is
controversial. We aimed  to evaluate the patients diagnosed  with PTC and
PTMC  in  terms  of  clinical,  ultrasonographical
(US)  and  histopathological
features and their relationships with tumor size.
Methods
We  retrospectively  evaluated
881  patients  who  underwent  thyroid  surgery
between 2007 and 2014 in our clinic and diagnosed with PTC histopathologically
were  enrolled  the  study.  Demographic  characteristics,  US  findings  and
histopathological features were evaluated.
Results
In total, 1264 nodules were identified in the 881 patients. The incidentality rates
were higher in the PTMC group and also in the %5 mm group. In total
multifocality rate was 32.9%, and it was significantly higher in PTMC group than
the PTC group. PTC and O5 mm PTMC groups compared to PTMC and %5 mm
groups respectively, were more aggresive histopathological features
Conclusion
Since the incidentality rates were found significantly more common in our
patients with PTMC and those with %5 mm, ultrasonographic features of the
nodules should be evaluated carefully and for cases which are suspicious with US,
US-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) should be considered in order to
make the correct treatment strategy. Also our study revealed that PTC and O5
mm PTMC groups compared to PTMC and %5 mm groups respectively, have
more aggresive histopathological features.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1108
EP1109
Screening and follow up of an extended Hungarian family with familial
medullary thyroid cancer
Zsuzsanna Valkusz1, Krisztian Sepp1, Janos Gardi1 & Attila Patocs2
1University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary;2Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) originates from the parafollicular or C cells
of  the  thyroid  gland  and  represents  approximately
10%  of  all  thyroid
malignancies. The operational classification of FMTC is four or more family
members with MTC without objective evidence of pheochromocytoma (PC) and
parathyroid hyperplasia. In multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) and
familial medullary thyroid cancer (FMTC), the majority of germline mutations
are restricted to specific positions in exons 10 and 11 of the RET gene. Germline
mutations may very occasionally occur in other exons, including exon 14 of the
RET gene. 1n 2000 we reported a large kindred where the V804M mutation and
the S836S variant were identified and only the V804M mutation associated with
FMTC. That time 80 members of the family were evaluated. In the past 15 years
the family has grown to 281 members. In our current study we summarized the
follow-up data obtained in patients with RET V804M mutation of this family.
Molecular screening of the family in the second generation indicated 6 genetically
positive patient from 13 that they have germline V804L mutation and a germline
S836S polymorphism in separate alleles in exon 14 of the RET gene. Five of the
six positive members were operated for medullary thyroid cancer, one patient
with known high level of calcitonin and nodular thyroid refused the surgery.
However, based on the 15 years of follow up data the cancer patients and the other
mutation carriers, showed no disease progression. None of the other family
members with positive genetic test had clinical or biochemical evidence of MTC
This current data confirm that the V804M mutation associates with FMTC
presenting as a mild phenotype.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1109
EP1110
Comparisson between two differnet protocols for the management of
patients with differnetiated thyroid cancer
Nicolás Crisosto, Vjeroka Inostroza, Cristián Campos, Francisca Gajardo,
Pamela Invernizzi, Felix Vasquez, Paola Hernández, Cecilia Pereira,
Amanda Ladrón de Guevara, Miguel Dominguez & Erika Diaz
Unit of Endocrinology, Hospital San Juan de Dios, Santiago, Chile.
Introduction
New techniques such as etapification ecotomography (EE) have led to less
invasive surgeries in Differentiated Thyroid Cancer (DTC). The trend in recent
years has been to a reduction in the doses of radioiodine administered. Our
hospital in 2013 incorporated these features to protocolize the administration of
radioiodine  depending  on  the  characteristics  of  the  tumour  and  the  initial
thyroglobulin levels, which may have had an impact in the response to treatment
(RT) compared to our previous practice.
Methods
Analysis of clinical records from patients that underwent Total Thyroidectomy
for DTC. Protocol 2012: no EE and RI dose between 50-200 mCi. Protocol 2013,
with EE and RI dose between 0-150 mCi. Patients were classified according to the
ATA risk for recurrence scale. RT was evaluated after one year as excellent,
acceptable or incomplete.
Results
84 patients from the 2012 protocol and 93 patients from the 2013 protocol were
analyzed. Age, sex and histology were comparable between both groups. The
2013 group underwent more conservative surgeries with a lower percentage of
patients  undergoing  lateral  dissections.  The  ATA  risk  distribution  was
comparable between the two groups (PZ0.978) Radioiodine dosages adminis-
tered to the 2013 group were significantly lower according to their risk group. The
RT distribution at one year follow up was similar between both groups. The
percentage of patients with an excellent response was comparable in the Low Risk
(2012: 80 vs 2013: 88% ; PZ0.22) Intermediate Risk (2012: 62.5 vs 2013: 70.2%
PZ0.446) and High Risk (2012: 38 vs 2013: 50% PZ0.546) ATA categories.
Conclusions
We observed that the 2013 protocol has a RT comparable to the 2012 protocol.
This allowed us to perform less invasive surgeries due to the incorporation of EE
and it supports the use of lower doses of RI.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1110
EP1111
Thyroid medullary and papillary carcinoma, a rare combination
Mustafa Suveran1, Pinar Sisman2, Aysen Akkurt3, Ozen Oz Gul2,
Soner Cander4, Erdinc Erturk2 & Canan Ersoy2
1Uludag University Medical School, Department of Internal Medicine,
Bursa, Turkey;2Uludag University Medical School, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;3Muradiye State Hospital,
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey;4Bursa
Yuksek Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Thyroid papillary carcinomas originate from thyroid follicular epithelia and are
the  most  frequent  thyroid  differentiated  carcinomas.  Medullary  thyroid
carcinomas  originate  from  thyroid  parafollicular  C  cells  and
%25  are  a
component of Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia (MEN) syndromes. Co-incidence
of the two condition on the same patient is so rare.
Case
78 years old female patient who has had simple goiter for 10 years, was
investigated about weight loss and palpitation. In the first visit thyroid function
tests and ultrasonography (USG) was applied. Thyrotropin level was !0.0025
mIU/ml and there was a 38!35 mm solid nodule on the right thyroid lobe
(Picture-1). Thyroid scintigraphy showed increased tracer uptake on the right lobe
and extremely decreased uptake on the left lobe (Picture-2). The patient was
informed about the treatment choices and decided to be operated. Before the
surgery  fine  needle  aspiration  biopsy
(FNAB)  was  applied,  the  result  was
suspicious for malignancy.
First, right lobectomy was performed and sent to the frozen. The result was
follicular lesion. According to this result total thyroidectomy was performed. The
pathology result of the left lobe was papillary microcarcinoma 4!3 mm at
diameter, no vascular invasion, no capsule invasion and no extra-thyroidal
involvement. The pathology of the tissue that had been resulted as follicular
lesion on frozen, resulted as medullary microcarcinoma 3!2 mm at diameter.
The tumor was surrounded by fibrous band and there were cell groups that
belong to the lesion on the adjacent thyroid tissue. There was no vascular and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
extra-thyroidal involvement. Because of the !5 mm tumor size and low risk
factors close follow-up was planned.
Conclusion
Either papillary and medullary carcinoma on the same patient is a very rare
condition  and  on  the  follow-up  need  to  be  evaluated  either  with  serum
thyroglobulin and calcitonin levels.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1111
EP1112
“Modified thyroidectomy difficultly score” for goiters in Iodine deficient
population
Sabaretnam Mayilvaganan, Naval Bansal, Anjali Mishra, Gaurav Agarwal,
Amit Agarwal & SK Mishra
Sanjay Gandhi Post graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India.
Introduction
Thyroid surgery was initially considered as “horrid butchery” due to associated
high morbidity and mortality, however with the advent of safe surgical techniques
and improved understanding of thyroid physiology, thyroid surgery has become
safer. Still there are certain intra-operative factors, as described in Difficulty
Thyroidectomy Scale (DTS)which are thought to be associated with adverse
outcome. However anatomical parameters also need to be addressed to make it
more  reliable  and  effective.  So,  aim  of  this  study  was  to  use  Modified
thyroidectomy difficulty scale (MTDS) and to know if anatomical variations
also contribute.
Material and Methods
Prospective study on patients who underwent thyroidectomy at Department of
Endocrine Surgery, SGPGIMS. We designed a MTDS (4 itemed thyroidectomy
difficulty scale with various anatomical parameters like location & branching of
recurrent laryngeal nerve, type of external branch of superior laryngeal nerve,
parathyroid glands, grade of tubercle of Zuckerkandl (TZ), and retrosternal
extension). It was filled by two endocrine surgeons blinded to each other at the
end of operation. Analysis was done to look for inter-observer variability and also
to compare surgical outcome in terms of operating time and complication rates.
Results
Total 30 patients were assessed on Modified thyroidectomy difficulty score.
Cohort included 15 (50%) euthyroid goiters, 12 (40%) toxic goiters, 2 (6.67%)
malignant and 1 (3.33%) patient of thyroiditis. Among both trainees, total and
individual parametric scores exhibited a high degree of correlation, which rules
out any observational bias. DTS correlates significantly with operating time
P!0.01, hypoparathyroidism PZ0.05 and nerve palsy P!0.01, where MTDS
correlates more strongly with operating time!0.01, hypoparathyroidism PZ0.02
and nerve palsy P!0.01. In difficulty score gland size (PZ0.00) and fibrosis
(PZ0.04) were significant factors. In modified score TZ grading (PZ0.003) was
the only factor.
Conclusion
Modified thyroidectomy score correlates more strongly with the operative time
and complication rates.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1112
EP1113
Role of early18F-FDG PET/CT in the management of differentiated
thyroid cancer patients with negative131I scan and elevated
thyroglobulin levels
Seo Young Sohn1, Jae Hyuk Lee1, Yoon Young Cho2, Jae Hoon Chung2 &
Sun Wook Kim2
1Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Seonam University
College of Medicine, Myongji Hospital, Goyang, Republic of Korea;
2Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Thyroid Center, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Background
Early detection of residual or recurrent cancer in patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer (DTC) is important, especially, when they do not uptake131I
uptake because these tumors do not likely benefit from radioiodine therapy
(RAIT). We aimed to evaluate the usefulness of FDG-PET/CT as an early
diagnostic work up in DTC patients with negative radioiodine whole body scan
(I-WBS) and elevated stimulated Tg (sTg) levels.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
This was a retrospective study. There were 48 consecutive patients with negative
I-WBS and elevated sTg level (O5 ng/ml) or positive Tg antibodies (TgAb).
FDG-PET/CT was performed within 12 months after first remnant ablation. True
positive rate and positive predictive value was calculated according to different
sTg levels (ng/ml). [5 % sTg ! 10 (nZ11), 10 % sTg ! 20 (nZ14), R20
(nZ19)] and positive anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (nZ4).
Results
FDG-PET/CT showed 12 (25%) true positive, 6 (%) false positive, 22 (38%) true
negative and 12 (21%) false negative results (sensitivity 60% specificity 79%).
True positive FDG-PET/CT leaded to additional surgery in 10 (21%) DTC
patients. True positive rate increased as sTg (ng/ml) level increases [9% in sTg
between 5-10, 21% in sTg between 10-20, 37% in sTgO20 and 25% in positive
TgAb]. Positive predictive value tended to increase with sTg increment [50% in
sTg between 5-10, 50% in sTg between 10 and 20, 88% in sTg O20 ng/ml and
50% in positive TgAb].
Conclusions
Early FDG-PET/CT is useful tool for tumor detection in DTC patients with
negative I-WBS and increased sTg levels and may change a treatment plan,
especially when sTg during I-WBS was greater than 20 ng/ml.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1113
EP1114
Markers predicting the contralateral lobe involvement in patients with
multifocal papillary thyroid carcinoma: An instutional case series of
914 patients
Sefika Burcak Polat, Bekir Cakir, Berna Ogmen, Husniye Baser,
Neslihan Cuhaci, Cevdet Aydin & Reyhan Ersoy
Yildirim Beyazit University, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Department, Ankara, Turkey.
Background
The characteristics of multifocal PTC remain controversial. Surgical approach to
multifocal tumor changes between centers. In cases that the initial procedure was
lobectomy, most clinicians would suggest for completion thyroidectomy since the
risk of PTC in the contralateral lobe is significant. This study aimed to evaluate
the incidence of bilateral involvement, predictive factors for bilaterality and
whether or not bilaterality was related with more aggressive histopathologic
features in patients with multifocal PTC.
Method
Medical  records  and  pathologic  data  of
914  patients  who  underwent  total
thyroidectomy and diagnosed with PTC were retrospectively reviewed. The
patients with multifocal disease were detected and subdivided into two subgroups
as unilateral-multifocal PTCs and bilateral multifocal PTCs. These two groups
were compared to each other regarding demographic, clinical and histopatholo-
gical features.
Result
Multifocal disease was detected in 294 patients (32.7%). Of all, 102 patients
(36.7%) had unilateral whereas 192 cases (65.3%) had bilateral involvement. As a
result of univariate analysis, bilaterality was significantly associated with the
number of tumor foci (P!0.001), tumor size (PZ0.008), TSH (PZ0.002) and
capsule invasion (PZ0.018). Multivariate analysis demonstrated that the number
of tumor foci and TSH level were independent risk factors for bilaterality in
multifocal PTC (P!0.001 and PZ0.006, respectively).
Conclusion
Incidence of bilateral tumors is high and increases with the number of tumor foci
in multifocal PTC. Bilateral involvement in multifocal PTC is not associated with
worse histopathological futures.TSH can be taken as a preoperative indicator able
to predict multifocal cancers and guide clinical decision making and surgical
management.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1114
EP1115
Abstract withdrawn.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1116
Thyroid nodules classified as bethesda 3: final diagnosis
Ana Barrera-Martín1, Paloma Moreno-Moreno1, Ángel Rebollo-Román1,
Rodrigo Bahamondes-Opazo1, Aura-Dulcinea Herrera-Martínez1,
María-Inmaculada Prior-Sánchez1, Pedro Seguí-Alpizcueta2 &
María-Ángeles Gálvez-Moreno1
1Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía (Endocrinology and Nutrition Service),
Córdoba, Spain;2Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía (Radiology Service),
Córdoba, Spain.
Introduction
The Bethesda System classifies suspicious thyroid nodules or those with a large
size after fine-needle aspiration (FNA) depending on the risk of malignancy
through its cytology study. Bethesda category 3 (B3) implies atypia of uncertain
significance or follicular lesion of undetermined significance. Objectives: To
determine the final diagnosis of category B3 nodules and the number of cases in
which a second or third FNA results in a conclusive category (B2, B4, B5 or B6).
Methods
Observational retrospective study of patients with thyroid nodules classified as
B3, evaluated between January 2012-December 2015 at “Hospital Universitario
Reina Sofía” in Córdoba. Results were analysed with SPSS 19.0. Statistical
analysis: Student’s t-test to compare means and Chi-squared test/ Fisher’s exact
test to compare proportions.
Results
88 patients, 83% females. Mean age: 52.8G13.9 years old. 65.9% of nodules
were suspicious on ultrasonography. Maximum diameter: 29.9G14.1 mm. 22.8%
of patients had symptoms related to their nodules, being dysphagia the most
prevalent. 61.4% of patients underwent surgical treatment, 55.6% of which were
thyroidectomies. Final diagnosis: 15.9% malignant, 45.5% benign and 38.6%
unknown. Final diagnosis after surgery: 42.6% adenoma, 21.1% benign follicular
nodule, 18.5% papillary carcinoma, 5.6% nodular Hashimoto and 12.2% others.
In the 75 nodules firstly classified as B3, a second FNA (performed in 45 patients)
was conclusive in 21 patients (46.6%). A third FNA (7 patients) was determinate
in 3 of them (42.9%). We didn’t find a statistically significant association between
malignant or benign disease with gender, age, symptomatology or size/sono-
graphic features of nodules in our series.
Conclusions
The prevalence of thyroid malignant illness classified as B3 in our study is
concordant with the previous published studies, being adenoma the most frequent
pathology after thyroidectomy. In nodules firstly categorized as B3, a second or
third FNA is determinate in less than half of the cases.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1116
EP1117
Association of multifocality, tumor number and total tumor diameter
with clinicopathological features in papillary thyroid cancer
Abbas Ali Tam1, Didem Ozdemir1, Neslihan Cuhaci1, Husniye Baser1,
Cevdet Aydin1, Aylin Kilicyazgan2, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ataturk Training and
Research Hospital, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
In this study, we aimed to evaluate impact of multifocality, tumor number and
total tumor diameter on clinicopathological features of PTC.
Methods
Medical records of 912 patients who underwent thyroidectomy and diagnosed
with PTC were reviewed retrospectively. Patients were grouped into 4 according
to number of tumoral foci; N1 (1 focus), N2 (2 foci), N3 (3 foci) and N4 (R 4
foci). The diameter of the largest tumor was considered as the primary tumor
diameter (PTD) and total tumor diameter (TTD) was calculated as the sum of the
maximal diameter of each lesion in multicentric tumors.
Results
Capsular invasion, extrathyroidal extension and lymph node metastasis were
significantly higher in patients with multifocal tumors compared to patients with
unifocal PTC. As the number of tumor increased, extrathyroidal extension and
lymph node metastasis also increased (PZ0.034 and PZ0.004, respectively).
The risk of lymph node metastasis was 2.287 (ORZ2.287, PZ0.036) times
higher in N3 and 3.449 (ORZ3.449, PZ0.001) times higher in N4 compared to
N1. Capsular invasion, extrathyroidal extension and lymph node metastasis were
significantly higher in multifocal patients with PTD%10 mm and TTD O 10 mm
than unifocal patients with tumor diameter%10 mm (P!0.001, P!0.001 and
PZ0.001, respectively). There was no significant difference in terms of these
parameters in multifocal patients with PTD%10 mm and TTDO10 mm and
unifocal patients with tumor diameterO10 mm.
Conclusion
In this study, increased tumor number was associated with higher rate of capsular
invasion, extrathyroidal extension and lymph node metastasis. In a patient with
multifocal papillary microcarcinoma, TTDO10 mm confers a similar risk of
aggressive histopathological behavior with unifocal PTC greater than 10 mm.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1117
EP1118
Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC): descriptive analysis and prognostic
factors in a multicenter study
Victoria Alcazar1, Concepcion Blanco2, Cristina Alvarez-Escola3,
Guadalupe Guijarro4, Javier Estrada5, Paz De Miguel6, Nuria Palacios5,
Alejandra Duran6, M. Carmen Montan˜ es6, Ainhoa Abad5,
Beatriz Lecumberri3, Soralla Civantos7 & Javier Aller5
1Hospital Universitario Severo Ochoa, Madrid, Spain;2Hospital Universi-
tario Principe de Asturias, Madrid, Spain;3Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain;4Hospital Universitario Getafe, Madrid, Spain;5Hospital
Universitario Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain;6Hospital
Universitario Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain;7Hospital Universitario
Fuenlabrada, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction
MTC accounts for 5% of thyroid cancers and can occur sporadically or as part of
the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndrome (MEN 2). The objective of our
study is to evaluate the prognostic factors and outcomes of patients with MTC in
the community setting.
Methods
Retrospective descriptive multicenter study of patients with histological diagnosis
of MTC. Descriptive, bivariate analyses (Student t for cuantitative and X2 test for
cualitative variables) and logistic regression with SPSS 19.0 were performed.
Results
102 patients were included (62% females). Median age at diagnosis: 45G16
years. Mean follow-up: 8 years. RET proto-oncogene mutations were found in
52% mainly in codon 634 (24.5%). Average basal calcitonin was 1497G3521
(median
402
pg/ml)  and  CEA
66G130 ng/ml.  All  cases  underwent  total
thyroidectomy, with cervical lymphadenectomy in 64 cases (63%). Stage after
surgery was I: 39%, II: 13%, III: 14% and IV: 34%. Residual disease was found in
44.5% (40% biochemical evidence of disease, 36% loco-regional metastasis and
24%  distant metastasis). They  were treated with additional surgery
(44%),
radiotherapy (11%) and/or tyrosinkinase inhibitors (13%). At the end of the
follow up, 48% patients remained free of disease, 9% had calcitonin/CEA levels
elevated without disease location, 8% had locorregional disease and 8% distant
metastasis; 5 patients died because of MTC. On bivariate analysis, absence of
cromogranin  A  staining,  stage,  local  invasion,  male  sex,  size,  presurgery
calcitonin levels were statistically significant predictors of residual disease after
surgery whereas local invasion, stage, size, pre and postsurgery calcitonin and
postsurgery CEA levels predicted persistent disease at the end of follow-up. Stage
remained the only statistically significant indicator of both residual disease after
surgery and persistent disease at last follow up on logistic regression analysis.
Conclusions
Only staging was significantly associated with persistent disease after surgery and
at the end of follow-up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1118
EP1119
Visualization of kallikreins in thyroid epithelial and carcinoma cells
Eileen Kroll1, Anastasija Pejkovska1, Maren Rehders1, Adam Lesner2,
Grzegorz Dubin3, Tomasz Kantyka3, Dagmar Fuhrer4, Jan Potempa3 &
Klaudia Brix1
1Department of Life Sciences and Chemistry, Jacobs University Bremen,
Bremen, Germany;2Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry,
University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland;3Faculty of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland;
4Klinik fur Endokrinologie & Stoffwechselerkrankungen und Zentrallabor,
Universitatsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.
Human tissue kallikreins (KLKs) are serine proteases expressed in various organs
including  thyroid  hormone-generating  and  target  tissues.  Besides  their
involvement in important physiological processes, KLKs are mainly recognized
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
for their association with pathological conditions like cancer. Previously, KLK2
and KLK3 transcripts were detected in normal thyroid and carcinoma tissue,
while the levels and subcellular distribution of KLK proteins remained largely
elusive. Since the thyroid gland is a hormonally regulated organ, we were
interested in investigating possible changes of KLK levels and localization in
thyroid  epithelial  and  carcinoma  cells  upon  stimulation  with  the  thyroid
stimulating hormone (TSH). The results revealed a redistribution of KLK2 and
KLK3 from centrally to peripherally located vesicles upon TSH stimulation of
thyroid epithelial cells, indicating TSH-regulated trafficking of KLKs in normal
thyrocytes. Moreover, KLK2 and KLK3 were localized to the nuclei of thyroid
carcinoma cells, but they were not detectable at this unexpected subcellular
localization in thyroid epithelial cells. Thus, KLKs might contribute to thyroid
carcinogenesis in different ways, i.e. by their enhanced expression and thus
altered protein homeostasis, and by proteolytically processing nuclear substrates
which are involved in the regulation of cell cycle progression.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1119
EP1120
Management of thyroid cancer in outpatient practice
4
Lina Zabuliene1,2, Ruta Einikyte3 & Jurgita Urboniene
1Clinics of Rheumatology, Traumatology - Orthopaedics and Reconstruc-
tive Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania;
2Antakalnio outpatient clinic, Vilnius, Lithuania;3Faculty of Medicine,
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania;4Infectious Diseases and
Tuberculosis Hospital, Vilnius University hospital Santariskiu klinikos,
Vilnius, Lithuania.
The incidence of thyroid cancer (TC) is increasing over time. Follow up and
adequate treatment of patients with TC is important in everyday routine practice.
The aim of the study was to evaluate peculiarities of clinical and pathologic
characteristics of patients with TC, and their management after surgery.
Material and methods
We conducted retrospective review of medical records of 116 patients with TC
after thyroid surgery followed up in Vilnius Antakalnio out-patient clinic. We
recorded demographic, clinical characteristics, TC morphology and extension,
treatment and TSH changes.
Results
Mean patients’ age was 57.24G16.45 years (87.1% female). Mean age at surgery
was 49.04G15.56 years. 44.9% patients were 41-60 years old at the time of
surgery. 88.8% of patients had multinodular goitre. 107 patients had papillary TC,
5 medullary, 4 other type. 22.9% patients had capsular invasion, 14.0% - vascular
invasion,
19.2% - lymph node metastases. Patients with TC with vascular
invasion were older than patients with TC without vascular invasion (37.62G
15.08 vs 49.30G15.00, PZ0.011). 67.3% patients were diagnosed at stage 1,
9.6% at stage 2, 19.2% at stage 3 and 3.8% had stage 4 disease. Mean TSH before
surgery was 2.01G1.87 mUI/l. Neither the presence of extra thyroidal extension,
nor vascular invasion, nor cancer stage was associated with TSH levels. Total
thyroidectomy was performed in 90.5% of patients and hemithyroidectomy in
9.5%. Radioiodine was administered to 94 patients. Patients have been followed
up for
6.50G5.74 year (range  0-26). Mean  daily dose of  L-thyroxin was
133.81G35.59 mcg (1.85G0.56 mcg/kg) keeping TSH suppression at the level of
0.43G0.65 mUI/l  (range 0-3.63). L-thyroxin dose correlated with patient’s
weight (P!0.0001).
Conclusions
Most frequently thyroid cancer is diagnosed in 41-60 years’ women and presents
as multinodular goitre, and papillary carcinoma. Long-term TSH suppression
after thyroid cancer surgery is kept in conformity with recommendations.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1120
EP1121
One thyroid, three tumors within: a case of three collision tumors
Despoina Selalmatzidou, Fotini Adamidou & Gesthimani Mintziori
Department of Endocrinology, Ippokratio General Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece.
Introduction
Collision tumors of the thyroid are neoplasms of distinct histology located within
the same gland. Although rare, the most commonly described collision tumors of
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
thyroid origin are medullary and papillary carcinomas. We describe a case of
co-existence  of  a benign  follicular  adenoma  in a  dominant  nodule  with  a
micropapillary  and  a  micromedullary  carcinoma  in  a  patient  carrying  a
heterozygous germline RET polymorphism.
Case report
A 74-year-old woman presented for follow up at the Endocrine Clinic, with a
history of thyroidectomy 10 years previously. Surgery had been recommended
because of a growing nodule at the isthmus, despite normal cytology at the
preceding  FNA,  biochemical  euthyroidism  and  negative  thyroid  antibodies.
Histological examination revealed a 2.8 cm encapsulated follicular adenoma at
the isthmus, a 0.3 medullary thyroid carcinoma in the right thyroid lobe with
evidence of infiltration of surrounding follicles and microscopic lymphatic vessel
infiltration and a 0.3 cm classic type papillary thyroid carcinoma in the left
thyroid lobe.
The  patient’s  past  medical  history  is  notable  for  rheumatoid  arthritis  and
Sjogren’s syndrome with associated pulmonary disease and a non-functioning left
adrenal adenoma. There was no evidence of MEN2 features other than MTC in
our patient, nor in any family members.
On ultrasound examination, a 1.4 cm vascularized remnant was visible in the left
thyroid bed, with no evidence of cervical lymphadenopathy. Biochemical testing
showed normal calcitonin at 3.23 pg/ml (!4.8), TSH 0.56 on L- thyroxine 88 mg
daily, thyroglobulin !0.2 ng/ml and negative anti-TG.
RET  oncogene  direct  sequencing  revealed  a  germline  G691S/S904S  poly-
morphism in heterozygosity.
Conclusion
The RET G691S/S904S polymorphism has been postulated as genetic modifier of
MEN2A, although the association of this haplotype with MTC and, moreover,
with follicular neoplasia, remains unknown.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1121
EP1122
A study on age and nodule size in affecting decision for repeat thyroid
FNAC after one benign cytology
Seong Keat Cheah1,2, Brian Pierce2, Anusha Kumar1,2, Tommy Kyaw
Tun1,2, Seamus Sreenan1,2, John McDermott1,2, Neil Hickey2,
Eamon Leen2, Muna Sabah2 & Thomas Walsh2
1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland;2Connolly Hospital
Blanchardstown, Dublin, Ireland.
Introduction
Fine needle aspiration cytology
(FNAC) is a widely adopted pre-operative
investigatory tool for thyroid nodules. The British Thyroid Association (BTA)
recently updated guidelines recommending that an FNAC that initially yields
benign cytology (Thy2) should be repeated if there is any clinical or ultrasound
(US) suspicion (1). We postulate that there is a tendency for a more conservative
approach in older age groups with smaller thyroid nodules on US studies.
Method
From our multidisciplinary meeting (MDM) database for thyroid nodules under
investigation from
2012-2015, we identified 126 cases with a single Thy2
cytology. Cases were recommended for clinical or US surveillance, repeat FNAC
or  surgery.  The  mean  age  and  nodule  size  was  compared  for  the  group
recommended a more conservative approach (clinical or US surveillance) and the
group recommended repeat FNAC or surgery. The mean difference was examined
and independent t-test applied.
Results
The group recommended for US (36 cases, 29%) or clinical surveillance (28
cases, 22%) has a mean age of 56.7G16.7 years with a mean nodule size of
25.1G15.2 mm (data are mean G standard deviation). The group recommended
for surgery (9 cases, 7%) or repeat FNAC (53 cases 42%) has a younger mean age
of 47G15.2 years with a larger mean nodule size at 33.7G15.2 mm. Between
these groups, there is a mean difference of 9.7 years (PZ0.001) for age and
8.5 mm for nodule size (PZ0.002).
Conclusion
After one benign thyroid cytology, there is a tendency for a more conservative
approach with US and clinical surveillance in older patients with smaller nodule
size. From this study, the thresholds directing such decisions lie at approximately
50 years of age and a nodule size of 30 mm.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1122
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
EP1123
Analysis of BRAF and RAS genetic alterations in thyroid cancer in the
Greek population
Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou1, Marilena Argyropoulou2,
Pagona Karanatsiou2, Georgios Papoutsidakis2, Alexandra Papadopoulou2,
Kalliopi Loukou2, Aikaterini Manolakelli2, Eleni Synadaki2,
George Vilaras3, Andreas Karameris3 & Kalliopi Liadaki2
1Department of Endocrinology, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece;
2Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Univeristy of Thessaly,
Larissa, Greece;3Department of Pathology, 417 Veterans Administration
Hospital, N.I.M.T.S., Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Thyroid cancer is one of the most common malignancies of the endocrine system
and displays a variety of histological patterns. The understanding of the molecular
pathogenesis and the identification of molecular markers which will be used for
diagnosis and prognosis is of high clinical significance. The most common
molecular alterations include BRAF and RAS point mutations and RET/PTC and
PAX8/PPARg rearrangements. The present study investigated the association of
BRAF and RAS mutations with thyroid cancer in a representative sample of the
Greek population.
Methods
The study included 65 patients: 54 with Papillary Thyroid Cancer (PTC), 7 with
Follicular, 3 with Medullary and 1 with Low Differentiation Thyroid Cancer.
Following the isolation of genomic DNA from tissue biopsies a) real-time
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and b) PCR and sequencing were used for the
identification of mutations in codon 600 of the BRAF gene and in codons 12, 13
and 61 of the HRAS, KRAS and NRAS genes.
Results
BRAF mutations were identified in 8 PTC samples, half of which were of
follicular subtype. All mutations include a 1799T/A conversion and a valine to
glutamic acid substitution at codon
600.  A PTC of follicular subtype was
identified harboring a mutation in the NRAS gene (181C/A, resulting in a
glutamine to lysine change in codon 61). Both mutations result in the activation of
the MAP kinase signaling pathway. No mutations were identified in the specific
codons of KRAS and HRAS genes.
Conclusion
Although the sample number is relatively small, the significantly low percentages
of BRAF and RAS mutations point to the conclusion that the molecular alterations
leading to thyroid cancer in the Greek Population may differ compared to those
previously reported, and this consideration should be taken into account regarding
the pathogenesis, progression and treatment of thyroid cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1123
EP1124
Adjuvant metformin (M) therapy in differentiated thyroid carcinoma
(DTC)
Margherita Balestra, Stefano Gay, Giorgia Pera, Lorenzo Mortara,
Eleonora Monti & Massimo Giusti
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, Genoa, Italy.
M shows an antiproliferative effect. In vivo, M reduces TSH in type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM) and DTC aggressiveness in DTC with T2DM. The aim of the
study was to evaluate in DTC diabetic (Gr1, nZ30 under M 1500 mg/day) and
non-diabetic without (Gr2, nZ83) or under M (gr3, nZ84; M 1000 mg/day) the
adjuvant role of M. Clinical and laboratory examinations were performed up to 24
months. At baseline the DTC groups were similar for age, gender, tumor stage,
disease duration, L-T4 dosage and % of subjects under statins. Only BMI was
higher in Gr1 and Gr3 respect to the Gr2. The RAI therapy was carried out with
lower percentage (PZ0.03) in the Gr1 than in the other groups. The patients did
not have changes in oncological disease, BMI and L-T4 dosage. In DTC patients
without T2DM compliance and tolerability towards M fairly. The most frequent
adverse events were gastrointestinal. Several Gr3 patients showed weight loss. M
adjuvant therapy resulted in a decrease of TSH levels in Gr3, initially higher
(P!0.0001) compared to the Gr2, with overlapping values assessment at 12-24
months. After the beginning of M the in Gr3, insulin levels were significant
(PZ0.05) lower in Gr3 then in Gr2. In only Gr3 an improvement of the lipid
profile was noted. Our data confirm the favorable evolution of the DTC and the
high number of DTC with obesity and metabolic disorders. In our T2DM with
DTC we have conflicting data (reduction in the use of RAI therapy vs higher
number of subjects with detectable thyroglobulin). Difficult is the start of M in
DTC patients, but its effects seem to favorable on TSH levels and lipidic status.
Our data seem to indicate that in vivo M has a partial adjuvant action. More
observation time and a wider coverage are needed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1124
EP1125
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma masquerading as subacute thyroiditis
Jelena Vainikonyte-Kristapone1, Neli Jakuboniene1, Lina Barsiene1,
Valdas Sarauskas2 & Gintaras Kuprionis3
1Department of Endocrinology, Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health
Sciences Kaunas Klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania;2Department of Pathology,
Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Kaunas Klinikos,
Kaunas, Lithuania;3Department of Radiology, Hospital of Lithuanian
University of Health Sciences Kaunas Klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is a rare form of thyroid carcinoma that is
associated  with  an  extremely  poor  prognosis.  Ultrasonography
(US)  and
subsequent fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) are the first diagnostic methods
in the assessment of a palpable thyroid mass. Nevertheless, some clinical and US
features of ATC are not specific. Here, we report on an extremely rare case of
ATC masquerading as subacute thyroiditis (SAT).
A 40-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for an examination of a rapidly
growing thyroid mass with slight pain in the neck. Three weeks before admission,
the patient noticed the mass on the right side of her neck, with discomfort while
swallowing. The woman had a history of antecedent viral symptoms. Physical
examination revealed an approximately 3 cm hard and tender mass palpable on
the right thyroid lobe. The laboratory inflammation markers, except for the
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were within normal range. Thyroid hormones
concentration and antithyroglobulin antibodies were normal. A chest X-ray and
the abdominal US didn‘t show any pathology. Thyroid ultrasound revealed a
3.4!2.6 cm mass with marked hypoechogenicity, ill-defined margins, and no
blood supply. Reactive and enlarged neck lymph nodes (level III-IV) were
detected.  Sonographically,  the  thyroid  lesions  were  indicative  of  SAT
differentiated  from  thyroid  abscess.  FNAB  from  suspicious  thyroid  was
performed. On cytologic examination, tumor cells with plentiful of neutrophils
were assessed, while the direct smear and culture were negative for bacteria. Total
thyroidectomy and enlarged neck lymph node dissection were performed. The
post-surgical pathologic assessment did not reveal any lymph node metastasis.
Histopathologically, ATC was evaluated.
This case demonstrates an extremely rare case of ATC that mimics SAT and
thyroid abscess. In the case of atypical clinical and ultrasonographic features of
SAT, a careful examination for thyroid malignancy should be proposed.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1125
EP1126
From thyroidectomy to thyroid cancer: epidemiological data from 2004
to 2014
Anastasios Anyfantakis, Eirini Vourliotaki, Eirini Michaela Foukaki,
Sophia Alexaki, Maria Avloniti, Aikaterini Chatziriga &
Aikaterini Stamataki
Venizelio General Hospital, Heraklio, Crete, Greece.
Background and aims
To evaluate the evolution of thyroid cancer epidemiological characteristics from
2004 to 2014.
Materials and methods
Retrospective analysis of histological data from thyroidectomies performed in our
hospital in the period 2004-2014.
Results
From 2004 to 2014, 2725 thyroidectomies (women 81% vs men 19%) were
performed in our hospital. In 1083 of these (40%) histologic examination revealed
thyroid cancer.
Thirty-four percent of all cancers were diagnosed from 2004 to 2010, while this
percentage arises to 66% during the last four years. Median age at diagnosis was
49.2 years.
In  almost  half
(43.7%)  of  thyroid  cancer  patients,  Hashimoto’s  thyroiditis
coexisted.
Forty-eight percent of cancers were multifocal, whereas in the remaining 52%
there was found a single focus on histologic examination. In the multifocal
cancers, median maximum focus was less than 1 cm in 68.7% and O1 cm in
31.3%.
Invasion of thyroid capsule was reported in 36.7% of all cancers.
A total  of
26.5%  showed  extrathyroidal  extension,  independently  of  the
maximum focus size.
It is interesting to report that frequency of invasive behaviour is increasing from
2008 to 2014. Histologic types: papillary 94%, follicular 2.5%, medullary 2.8%,
Hurtle-cell 0.6%, anaplastic 0.1%.
Conclusions
i) The percentage of thyroid cancers is gradually increasing per year in the period
studied, which could mean:
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
- more targeted pre-surgery diagnostic evaluation and referral for thyroidectomy.
- a possible real increase in thyroid cancer frequency.
ii) Maximum frequency of thyroid cancer in middle aged patients, mainly women.
iii) Coexistence of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis in almost 50% of cases.
iv) Independently of maximum thyroid cancer focus, increased frequency of
invasive behaviour is reported during the last 5 years.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1126
EP1127
Baseline serum TSH and risk of thyroid microcarcinoma in non-toxic
nodular thyroid disease
Dimitrios Askitis, Eleni I Efremidou, Michael Karanikas,
Gregory Tripsianis, Alexandros Polychronidis & Nikolaos Liratzopoulos
First University Department of Surgery, University General Hospital of
Alexandroupolis, Alexandroupolis, Greece.
Aim
Thyroid cancer comprises the most common endocrine malignancy and a variety
of studies have examined the role of TSH as an independent risk factor for the
manifestation  of  differentiated  thyroid  cancer  in  otherwise  benign  thyroid
disorders. Objective of the current retrospective study was the assessment of a
possible relation between baseline serum TSH and thyroid microcarcinoma in a
patient  cohort  with  non-toxic  thyroid  disorders  and  without  preoperative
cytological establishment of thyroid cancer who underwent total thyroidectomy.
Patients and methods
Between 1 January 2005 and 1 March 2010, 186 patients (146 female/40 male)
underwent  total  thyroidectomy  because  of  nodular  thyroid  disease  in  our
Department.  Thyroid  specimens  were  histopathologically  examined  at  the
University Pathology Department for the establishment of the final diagnosis of
benignity  or  malignancy.  Median  values  of  preoperative  serum  TSH  were
estimated in both dignity groups and the results were compared  regarding
preoperative diagnosis.
Results
Thirty-two patients (17.2%) were diagnosed with microcarcinoma (rate females:
males 2.2:1), while 154 patients (82.8%) were free of malignancy. The median
value of basal serum TSH was higher in the malignancy group and without
statistical significance (1.02 vs 0.80; P value 0.293). Regarding patients with
solitary thyroid nodule TSH presented higher in the benignity cohort (1.3 vs 0.83;
P value 0.289), whereas in patients with non-toxic multinodular goiter TSH was
higher in the malignancy group but marginally without statistical significance
compared to the benignity group (1.16 vs 0.75; P value 0.05)
Conclusions
In the present study, basal serum TSH did not feature an independent risk
predictor for the development of thyroid microcarcinoma in non-toxic nodular
thyroid diseases. A borderline non-significant trend of higher TSH was shown
however in non-toxic multinodular goiter harbouring malignancy. Further studies
evaluating the role of TSH in thyroid cancer are required.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1127
EP1128
Nuclear cysteine cathepsins in thyroid carcinomas
Alaa Al-Hashimi, Sofia Tedelind1, Joanna Szumska1, N Kim Dierkes1,
Alexandra Pinzaru1, Roberta Burden2, Christopher Scott2, Dagmar Fuhrer3
& Klaudia Brix1
1Jacobs University, Bremen, Germany;2School of Pharmacy, Queen’s
University, Belfast, UK;3Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
University Hospital, Essen, Germany.
Cysteine cathepsins are endo-lysosomal proteases that play crucial roles in
thyroid physiology. However, in thyroid cancer, cathepsin B is overexpressed and
secreted into the extracellular space, thus promoting migratory phenotypes of
thyroid carcinoma cells through excessive extracellular matrix degradation. In
addition, we have shown that N-terminally truncated forms of cathepsins B and V
which lack the signal peptide and parts of the pro-peptide are localized to the
nuclei of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cells, while cathepsin L is present within
endo-lysosomes as expected.
Cathepsins B, L, and V were also examined in a variety of different human thyroid
carcinoma  cell  lines  in  comparison  to  normal  thyroid  epithelial  cells  by
immunofluorescence and immunoblotting studies, revealing differential protein
levels and/or subcellular distribution patterns of the different cathepsins in distinct
cell lines. In particular, cathepsin V reached the nuclear compartment of thyroid
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
carcinoma cells in vitro. For correlation of nuclear cysteine cathepsin activities to
phenotypic characteristics of thyroid carcinoma cells, over-expression studies
were performed with different molecular forms of the cysteine cathepsins B and V
which were analysed as chimeric GFP-tagged proteins in synchronized cultures.
Here, the results showed again that cathepsin V was trafficked to the nuclei of
thyroid carcinoma cells.
In keeping with the hypothesis that nuclear tasks of cysteine cathepsins reside in
the processing of nuclear proteins which are relevant for cell cycle progression,
thyroid  cancer  tissue  was  analysed  in  addition.  Cathepsin  V  was  found
prominently in the cellular nuclei of follicular thyroid carcinoma tissue, but not
in papillary thyroid carcinoma.
We conclude that cathepsin V rather than cathepsins B and L might serve
important functions within the nuclei of certain thyroid carcinoma cells.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1128
EP1129
The diagnostic value of FNAB for early diagnosis of thyroid cancer:
a Greek center experience
Eleni Triantafillou1, Georgios Papadakis1, Paraskevi Manitarou1,
Evgenia Panagiotidi1, Fotini Kanouta1, Aspasia Drosou1,
Philippos Kaldrymidis1, Victoria Kaltzidou1, Eleni Tsouma2,
Anastasia Alexiadou2, Styliani Plyta2 & Athanasia Tertipi1
1Department of Endocrinology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital, Pireaus,
Athens, Greece;2Department of Cytology, Metaxa Anticancer Hospital,
Pireaus, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) is the initial investigation of choice for
thyroid nodules.
Methods
A total of 563 patients (106 males/457 females) underwent FNAB for the same
number of thyroid nodules. Their mean age was 56.1G14.1 years. We correlated
the demographic profile (age and gender) and sonographic features of these
nodules with the FNAB outcome. The Bethesda system for reporting thyroid
cytopathology was used.
Results
Out of total 563 cases, 190 (33.7%) cases were diagnosed as non diagnostic (B1),
339
(60.2%) were diagnosed as benign (B2), 17 (3.0%) as B3 (atypia/follicular
lesion of undetermined significance), 7 (1.2%) as B4 (follicular neoplasm or
suspicious for follicular neoplasm), while 5 (0.9%) cases were categorized as B5
(suspicious for malignancy) and 5 (0.9%) as B6 (malignant). Remarkably, two
nodules of category B5 and B6 each had a maximum diameter of 9 mm and 8 mm
respectively. When comparing benign result (B2) vs result of category B3-6,
irregular shape (7.1% in B2 vs 17.6% in B3-6, X2Z4.66, PZ0.043), ill-defined
margins of the nodule (13.3% in B2 nodules vs 29.4% in B3-6 nodules, X2Z6.4,
PZ0.020), and the presence of calcifications (34.2% in B2 nodules vs 64.7% in
B3-6 nodules, X2Z12.3, PZ0.001) decreased significantly the possibility for
benign (B2) result, whereas features such as the size of nodule, the presence of
central vascularity, the composition and the hypoechogenity of the nodule did not
affect the possibility for B2 vs B3-6 result. Finally, there was no association of
gender and age with the Bethesda category result.
Conclusion
Our study supports that the irregular shape of a nodule, ill defined margins, and
the presence of calcifications decrease the possibility of a Bethesda benign result.
FNAB of nodules !10 mm may reveal suspicious or positive for malignancy
cytology.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1129
EP1130
Diagnostic and prognostic aspects of immunomorphology of post-
chernobyl encapsulated follicular thyroid tumours
Alexander Abrosimov1,2, Nina Dvinskikh3 & Eugeny Lushnikov3
1Federal State Institution Endocrinology Research Center, Moscow, Russia;
2National University of Science and Technology MISiS, Moscow, Russia;
3A.F. Tsyb Medical Radiology Research Center, Obninsk, Russia.
Background
An  increased  incidence  of  thyroid  cancer  among  young  population  of
contaminated territories of Russia after Chernobyl accident made very important
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
morphological verification of diagnosis. Many epidemiological and molecular
studies of post-Chernobyl thyroid cancer conducted by various research teams
required an independent review of tumour histology. The International Pathology
Panel formed consensus diagnosis for each case of post-Chernobyl thyroid
tumours and proposed an appropriate algorithm of morphological diagnosis
(E.D.Williams et al., 2000). The main diagnostic problem arose for estimation of
malignancy in some encapsulated follicular thyroid tumours. Doubtful features of
tumour capsular invasion and focal morphological nuclear changes in tumour
cells could be a reason to distinguish among benign thyroid tumours a group of
borderline lesions or tumours of uncertain malignant potential. This classification
group is not widely accepted, as the malignancy of encapsulated follicular thyroid
tumours should be more precisely determined.
Aim
To  analyse  diagnostic  and  prognostic  significance  of  immunoexpression  of
markers of malignancy in encapsulated thyroid tumours.
Material and methods
We  studied  an  immunoexpression  of  markers  of  malignancy:  Galectin-3,
Cytokeratin-19, HBME-1, Fibronectin and Cyclin D1 in 51 benign, 87 malignant
and 53 tumours of uncertain malignant potential.
Results
We revealed that 3.9% benign and 41.5% tumours of uncertain malignant
potential express the markers of malignancy with a level of diagnostic specificity
of 98-100%. Follow up during the period of 1-10 years after surgical thyroid
lobectomy for borderline tumours showed no progression of tumour growth.
Conclusion
We concluded that some of benign and borderline thyroid tumours are represent
malignant neoplasms with low grade and favourite prognosis.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the confirmation of diagnosis provided by the
International  Pathology  Panel  of  the  Chernobyl  Tissue  Bank:  Professors
T.I.Bogdanova, G.Fadda, G.Hunt, M.Ito, V.LiVolsi, J.Rosai, E.D.Williams.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1130
EP1131
Fine needle thyroid biopsy - time to change of indications?
Marek Maciejewski1,2, Agnieszka Sawicka1,2, Michal Slomian1,
Renata Budzynska-Nosal1, Beata Kozlowska1 & Krzysztof Marczewski1,3
1Department of Nephrology, Endocrinology, Hypertension and Internal
Disease Voivodeship Hospital of Pope John Paul II, Zamosc, Poland;
2University of Management and Administration, Zamosc, Poland;
3The Faculty of Medicine Lublin University of Economy and Innovation,
Lublin, Poland.
Introduction
After a period of enthusiasm for the early detection of cancer, apparently we are
entering a period of skepticism, questions and side effects in the form of
unnecessary operations and their complications and costs. This also applies to
thyroid cancer, and actually nodules and lesions visible only in ultrasound-
Method. Prospective observation of consecutive patients in one centre.
Results
In Years 2013 and 2014 we have performed 2189 ultrasound guided fine needle
biopsy of thyroid gland. Indication were determined in accordance with the
recommendations of the National Society of Endocrinology. Ambulatory patients
(1702) were referred by family doctors and specialists, hospital patients (487)
only by endocrinologists. Based on biopsy were diagnosed 6 cases of thyroid
cancer (0.3%) but only 1 (0.06%) in outpatients and 5 by inpatients (1%). The
results “suspicion” about the cancer as follicular or oxyphilic lesions was by 29
(1.3%)  patients.  We  must  point  out  that  patients  referred  for  biopsy  by
endocrinologists with palpable changes have a much larger risk of finding
pathological changes than be referred only based on ultrasound image.
All patients except one with an established tumor of the thyroid have clear clinical
symptoms, in the form of compression and/or rapid tumor growth. The risk of
cancer is found in the thyroid biopsy, if there are no clinical symptoms seem very
small in our region. However, the decision to take or omission of such diagnosis
in patients with incidentally detected changes in the ultrasound must be taken
together with the patient, because the patient will bear the consequences for
delayed treatment of cancer or complications of unnecessary surgery.
Conclusion
The decision on whether to carry out a biopsy the thyroid gland and its possible
therapeutic consequences should be taken jointly with the conscious patient,
especially in areas with low incidence of thyroid cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1131
EP1132
Ultrasonographic scoring index can be useful in the prediction of
thyroid malignancy in subcentimeter and supracentimeter thyroid
nodules
Neslihan Cuhaci1, Berna Ogmen2, Ali Tam1, Cevdet Aydin1,
Oya Topaloglu1, Aylin Kilic Yazgan3, Gurkan Dumlu4, Reyhan Ersoy1 &
Bekir Cakir1
1Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of Medicine, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ataturk Education and
Research Hospital, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara,
Turkey;3Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Department of
Pathology, Ankara, Turkey;4Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University School of
Medicine, Department of General Surgery, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
The increased rate of thyroid malignancy as well as incidental and subcentimeter
thyroid nodules have been attributed to increasing use of high-resolution US
which can detect the non-palpabl or subcentimeter (maximum diameter %1 cm)
thyroid nodules. We aimed to evaluate the sonographic features of the tyroid
nodules between %1 cm and O 1 cm according the histopathology results and to
determine  the  ultrasonographical  predictive  factors  for  malignancy  and  an
ultrasonographic score according the sonographic features to avoid unnecessary
fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB).
Methods
We retrospectively evaluated 2233 nodules of 1118 patients who underwent
thyroidectomy.  Predictive  factors  for  distinguishing  between  malignant  and
benign  histopathologic  results  according  the  ultrasonographic features  were
evaluated by multivariate logistic regression analysis. Multiple binary logistic
regression with the forward logistic regression method was used to develop the
formula for recommending sonographically guided biopsy.
Results
Among the 2233 nodules 337 nodules were in the %1 cm (group 1), 1896 were in
the O1 cm (group 2). According the histopathological results, in group 1; 173
nodules were in the benign, 164 nodule were in the malignant group. Whereas in
group 2; 1423 nodules were in the benign, 473 nodules were in the malignant
group. In group 1, AP/T R1, the presence of microcalcification, macrocalcifica-
tion and hypoechoic pattern were significantly higher in the malignant group
and in group 2, the presence of microcalcification, macrocalcification, hypoechoic
and iso-hypoechoic pattern, solid texture, peripheral and intranodular vascular-
ization pattern were significantly higher in the malignant group. In group 1, the
best ultrasonographic index score was found O2, whereas in group 2 the it was
found O4.
Conclusion
Our  US  scoring  may  lead  to  clinicians  and  surgeons  to  diagnose  thyroid
malignancy more accurately and to select the nodules for FNAB especially in
subcentimeter nodules.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1132
EP1133
Thyroglobulin (Tg) levels post initial treatment predict the recurrence
risk in differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC)
Teresa Ruiz de Azua, Blanca Gonzalez, Pedro Gonzalez, Francisco Javier
Santamaria & Sonia Gaztambide
Hospital Universitario Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain.
Aim
To know if Tg levels after treatment (total thyroidectomy and radioiodine
ablation) in the DTC can predict their prognosis in the long term.
Material and methods
Basal Tg and Tg after rh-TSH were measured in 229 patients with DTC without
any evidence of residual tumour (negative neck ultrasonography) after treatment.
The group was followed until tumour recurrence or, if recurrence was not found,
a minimum of 12 month (mean G SD Z63G37 months).
Test  response  was  classified  in  three  categories:  Excellent  response:  Tg
stimulated
!1  ng/ml;  indeterminate  response:  1-10  ng/ml  and  incomplete
response: O10 ng/ml. All selected cases had negative Tg-antibodies.
Results
The relationship between Tg level and recurrence is described in the following
table.
When initial Tg levels were positive, but tumour recurrence was not detected at
the end of the follow up (nZ32), the evolution of Tg stimulated levels was
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Tg stimulated
! 1 ng/ml
1-10 ng/ml   O10 ng/ml
Total
Recurrence YES
1
(0.5%)
8
(21.6%)
7
(70%)
16
Recurrence NO
181
29
3
213
Total
182
37
10
229
Tumour recurrence was localized: 14 lymphadenopathy, 1 lung metastasis,
2 local. Time recurrence: 3-104 months (mean: 41, median 34).
studied. Eight out of 32 patients showed an increase of Tg levels, in 3 cases Tg
levels were stable, in 8 patients Tg decreased and in other 6 cases Tg became
indetectable (without any additional treatment). In 7 patients Tg stimulated was
no measured.
Conclusions
1. When Tg stimulated levels post-treatment are undetectable the possibility of
recurrence is minimal.
2. The probability of recurrence increases according to Tg levels.
3. However, it has to be considered that a positive Tg level can decrease and even
become negative during the follow-up.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1133
EP1134
Cerebellar metastasis from follicular thyroid carcinoma
Giovani Rojas Martelo, Pedro Iglesias Lozano, Juan José Díez Gómez,
Victor Rodríguez Berrocal, Hector Pian Arias & Daniel Jiménez Zapata
Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.
Differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC) is the most frequent endocrine neoplasm.
Follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) is the second histological variant in frequency
after papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Cerebellar metastases from DTC are
extremely rare, corresponding about 1% of all cerebellar metastases, and being
the majority metastases from PTC. To the best of our knowledge there have been
no reported cerebellar metastases from CFT so far. We present here the first
clinical case of cerebellar metastasis from FTC. She was a 78 year-old woman
who underwent total thyroidectomy 23 years ago showing an atypical thyroid
adenoma  in  the  left  thyroid  lobe  in  the  pathological  study.  She  received
radioiodine therapy in several occasions (total accumulated dose 704 mCi). A
chest computed tomography (CT) performed 15 years later identified two lung
nodules with cervical lymphadenopathies. Cervical ultrasound and fine-needle
aspiration
(FNA)  was  performed,  showing  reactive  lymphadenitis.  Serum
thyroglobulin levels were increasing in subsequent medical visits (4.8 to 57.9
ng/ml). Thyroglobulin antibody levels were always negative. In the follow-up
localizing study a whole body CT scan revealed stable pulmonary metastases and
an image at the left cerebellar hemisphere level compatible with metastasis of
2!1.6 cm. The patient underwent surgery of the cerebellar lesion. Inmunohis-
tochemical findings showed a thyroid origin of the metastatic lesion, with tumor
cells  with  diffuse  and  intense  positivity  for  cytokeratin
7
(CK7),  thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and thyroglobulin, focal and weak positivity for
CK19, and negativity for PGAF, Galectin-3 and CK20. The analysis of V600K
V600E BRAF gene mutations was negative. These findings support histological
metastasis from FTC. In conclusion, we report the by first time a patient with
cerebellar  metastasis  from  FTC,  who  was  successfully  treated  by  surgical
resection.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1134
EP1135
Can ratio of primary tumor diameter to total tumor diameter be a new
parameter in the differential diagnosis of agressive and favorable
multifocal papillary thyroid microcarcinoma?
Abbas Ali Tam1, Didem Ozdemir1, Neslihan Cuhaci1, Husniye Baser1,
Ahmet Dirikoc1, Cevdet Aydin1, Aylin Kilicyazgan2, Reyhan Ersoy1 &
Bekir Cakir1
1Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ataturk Training and
Research Hospital, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
In this study, we aimed to evaluate the usefulness of ratio of primary tumor
diameter to total tumor diameter as a new parameter for the differentiation of
agressive and favorable papillary thyroid microcarcinomas (PTMC).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
Methods
The diameter of the largest tumor focus was taken as the primary tumour diameter
(PTD). For multifocal tumors, total tumor diameter (TTD) was calculated as the
sum of the maximal diameter of each lesion. A ratio was obtained by dividing
PTD to TTD and defined as tumor diameter ratio (TDR) (PTD/TTDZTDR).
Positive (PPV) and negative predictive values (NPV) and sensitivity and specifity
of TDR to predict capsular invasion, extrathyroidal extension (ETE) and lymph
node metastasis (LNM) were determined.
Results
Mean  TDR  significantly  decreased  as  number  of  tumor  foci  increased.  In
multifocal PTMCs, the sensitivities of TDR for the detection of LNM, ETE and
capsular invasion were 100%, 100% and 94.2%, respectively, the specifities were
86.2%, 88% and 94.7%, respectively. TDR had a PPV of 99.3% and NPV of
100% for LNM; PPV of 58.5% and NPV of 100% for ETE; and PPV of 89.1% and
NPV of 97.3% for capsular invasion. In patients with multifocal PTCO10 mm,
mean TDR was signficantly lower in patients with LNM compared to ones
without LNM (0.76G0.12 vs 0.44G0.10; P!0.001).
Conclusion
Decreased TDR was associated with capsular invasion, ETE and LNM in patients
with multifocal PTMC. It was also predictive for LNM even in patients without
capsular invasion or ETE. This new parameter might be particularly helpful for
the detection of aggressive behavior in multifocal PTMCs.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1135
EP1136
Overview of differentiated thyroid cancer in a tertiary health care
center in the Canary Islands
Ricardo Darias-Garzón, Javier García-Fernández, Bruno Francisco
García-Bray & Benigno Emilio Rivero-Melián
Hospital Universitario Nuestra Sen˜ ora de la Candelaria, Santa Cruz de
Tenerife, Spain.
Introduction
Our objective is to determine the profile of patients with differentiated thyroid
cancer (DTC) attended in our center and the therapeutic approach employed.
Methods
Retrospective review of medical records from patients treated for DTC during the
years 2013 and 2014.
Results
Data from 387 patients, 84% female, 96% Caucasian, mean follow up of 10.82
years. The average age at diagnosis was 44.24 years, 77% had normal thyroid
function, and 42% positive thyroid autoimmunity. The fine needle aspiration
(FNA) results prior to surgery (Bethesda criteria) were: Category (C) 1 0.9% of
cases C2 28.2%, C5 39.9%, C6 20.2%, while the remaining 10.8% were shared
between C3 and C4. 27.5% had more than one loci, with certain predilection for
the right lobe (42.3%, 32% for left lobe, 5% in isthmus and 20.7% bilateral).
Regarding the histological type, papillary carcinoma predominated, with 70% of
cases, 27.3% were follicular carcinomas (including Hurthle cell carcinoma); the
remaining 2.7% were shared between poorly differentiated, mixed forms and
insular  carcinoma.  The  surgical  approach  consisted  in  total  or  near-total
thyroidectomy in 93.9% of cases, with only 6.1% being hemithyroidectomies;
87.1% of patients received an ablative dose of I-131 after surgery. 153 cases had
enough data available for staging, stage I being predominant with 74.5% of cases
(stages II, III and IV, 11.1%, 13.1% and 1.3% respectively). Only 2.1% had
recurrent nerve paralysis, and 5.9% suffered persistent hypoparathyroidism.
Conclusions
In our series the percentage of follicular neoplasms is higher than reported in the
literature. Taking into account the recommendations from the 2015 guidelines of
the  American  Thyroid  Association,  the  therapeutic  approach  was overly
aggressive, both for the extent of surgery and the subsequent use of I-131.
However, the rate of severe complications resulting from surgery is not high.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1136
EP1137
Fine-needle aspiration of thyroid nodules: our experience before and
after Bethesda
Iulia Andrada Ioana1, Tadhg Gleeson2, Maurice Murphy3 & Obada Yousif4
1Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland;2Department of Radiology, Wexford General Hospital,
Wexford, Ireland;3Department of Histopathology, University Hospital
Waterford, Waterford, Ireland;4Department of Endocrinology, Wexford
General Hospital, Wexford, Ireland.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Introduction
Thyroid nodules are common. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) has an
essential  role  in  the  evaluation  of  thyroid  nodules,  but  results  may  be
nondiagnostic. A standardised (FNAC) reporting system: Bethesda system for
reporting thyroid cytology (BSRTC) is widely used.
Purpose
The aim of this study was to assess the diagnostic accuracy of (FNAC) of thyroid
nodules performed at our Hospital before and after the introduction of (BSRTC).
Methods
We studied records of all patients who had undergone (FNAC) in the period
between 2005 and 2015. We identified two methods of (FNAC) reporting:
Traditional and (BSRTC) reporting. The ‘traditional’ reporting system was as
follow: nondiagnostic; benign; suspicious or malignant. The (BSRTC) used the
‘thy’ classification. We used SPSS v 15 statistical package for Analysis.
Results
The total number studied was 156. Mean age for the traditional group was
56.93G14.87  vs.
59.39G13.57  in  the
(BSRTC)  group  (PZ0.34).  Overall
diagnostic  adequacy  was
95/156
(60.9%).  In  the
‘traditional  group’,  the
diagnostic accuracy was 62/118 (52.54%) vs. 33/38 (86.84%) in the (BSRTC)
group (PZ0.001). We re-evaluated all non-diagnostic cytology reported with the
‘traditional method’ now using (BSRTC) system. Cytology reports were assigned
a group (Thy 1-5). Of the 56 non- diagnostic cytology: 17/56 (30.4%) were
reassigned to thy2; 1/56 (1.8%) to thy3; 38/56 (67.8%) remained as thy1 (non-
diagnostic). Reclassification improved the overall diagnostic accuracy to 113/156
(72.43%)
(PZ0.015) with an improvement in the traditional group diagnostic
yield to 80/118 (67.8%) (PZ0.008).
Conclusion
The use of the (BSRTC) reporting system improved our (FNAC) diagnostic yield
significantly.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1137
EP1138
The prevalence of thyroid malignancy incidentally detected by
ultrasound in patients with non-thyroidal head and neck cancer
E Joo Yun1, D Young Yoon1, Y Jung Kim2 & K Won Oh3
1Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Department of Radiology, Seoul,
Republic of Korea;2Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Department of
Endocrinology, Seoul, Republic of Korea;3Kangbuk Samsung Hospital,
Department of Endocrinology, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Thyroid cancer is one of the common head and neck malignancies and may be
found incidentally with other head and neck cancers. The purpose is to evaluate
the prevalence and risk of malignancy in incidental thyroid lesions identified by
ultrasound (US) in patients with head and neck cancer. We retrospectively
reviewed medical records of all patients with head and neck cancer other than of
thyroid origin between January 2004 and January 2012. A total of 697 patients
(542 men and 155 women; mean age, 59.1G12.7 years) underwent US of the
neck for the evaluation of cervical lymph node status (including thyroid gland).
We evaluated the prevalence of patients with incidental thyroid lesions identified
by US and the risk of malignancy in these patients. Of the 697 patients with head
and neck cancer, 236 (33.9%) had incidental thyroid lesions on US. Based on
US findings, 61 patients underwent fine-needle aspiration, with 39 eventually
undergoing thyroidectomy. Among these thyroid lesions, 24 incidental thyroid
lesions of 22 patients were histologically proven to be malignant (23 papillary and
1 follicular carcinomas). The risk of malignancy was 9.3% on a patient-by-patient
basis. We propose that screening of the thyroid gland should be included in the
preoperative US examination for cervical lymph node metastases in patients with
non-thyroidal head and neck cancer.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1138
EP1139
Our experience with low doses of radioactive iodine (30 mCi) in patients
with differentiated thyroid cancer
Inmaculada Prior-Sánchez1, Concepción Mun˜ oz Jiménez1, Paloma Moreno
Moreno1, Ángel Rebollo Román1, Ana Barrera Martín1, Estefanía Moreno
Ortega2, Juan Antonio Vallejo Casas2 & María Ángeles Gálvez Moreno1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism (Reina Sofia University
Hospital, Córdoba), Cordoba, Andalucia, Spain;2Department of Nuclear
Medicine (Reina Sofia University Hospital, Córdoba), Cordoba, Andalucia,
Spain.
Background
The management of patients with differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) has been
changing in recent years and aggressiveness of treatment depends on the risk of
persistent or recurrent disease.
Objective
The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of low doses of Radioactive Iodine
(RAI;131I) therapy in patients with DTC.
Methods
We  retrospectively  evaluated  all  patients  who  were  diagnosed  with  DTC
(nZ213) at a tertiary hospital center in Cordoba (Spain), between January 2000
and December 2013. In all patients included, initial treatment consisted of total or
subsequent completion thyroidectomy, with or without lymphadenectomy, RAI
ablation therapy at a dose of 30 mCi (nZ17) or R100 mCi: 100 mCi (nZ143),
150 mCi (nZ5), 200 mCi (nZ4). Demographic and clinical variables were
compared between both groups of RAI therapy.
Results
Seventeen patients received a low dose of131I (10\; 7_; 100% papillary). All
subjects were classified as low risk of recurrence according to the revised ATA
guidelines. Differences were found in the main prognostic factor as aggressive
histological criteria (PZ0.014), pTNM Stage (PZ0.045), stimulated thyroglo-
bulin (Stim-Tg) measured at 6-12 months (PZ0.007). Statistically significant
differences were not found in age (!45 or R45 years), sex, histology, total
thyroidectomy  or  subsequent  completion,  neck  lymphadenectomy,  and  the
number of adverse effects. The hospitalization time was lower in the group of
patients who received
30 mCi (6 hours us R48 hours; P!0.001). All of
17 patients had no evidence of disease after an average follow-up of 3.59 years.
Up to now, recurrence has been detected in none of them.
Conclusions
Therapy with low doses of 131I (30 mCi) is an effective treatment in patients with
low-risk of recurrence with de advantage of having a lower hospitalization time.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1139
EP1140
A giant lung metastasis of thyroid papillary carcinoma
Yusuf Karadeniz1, Adem Gungor1, Naile Gokkaya1, Arzu Bilen2 &
Habib Bilen1
1Ataturk University Faculty of Medicine, Internal Medicine, Endocrinology
and Metabolism Department, Erzurum, Turkey;2Ataturk University Faculty
of Medicine, Internal Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey.
Introduction
Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) patients with distant metastasis (DM) have
variable clinical forms. PTC mostly metastasizes to the regional cervical lymph
node. Metastasis rate is approximately 20-90% available when diagnosed. In
addition, the overall incidence of DM is approximately 10%. DM are usually to
the lungs, bone and brain. Furthermore rarely liver, pancreas, skeletal muscle,
adrenal gland, ovaries, sphenoid sinuses and submandibular gland metastases can
be occurred. Lung metastases of PTC can manifest as local mass, nodular,
multiple miliary metastases, generalized lymphadenopathy and pleural effusion.
Case report
A 61-year-old woman presented to the outpatient clinic with complaints of dry
hacking cough and chest pain. Chest x-ray revealed major pulmonary lesions
(90!131 mm) which was confirmed on computed tomography analysis (3D
Measurement 99!102!126 mm). Transthoracic lung biopsy was performed and
PTC metastasis was diagnosed in histological examination. Since the histological
diagnosis was PTC, we checked the thyroid gland. Ultrasound examination of
thyroid gland showed 30!34 mm and 20!15 mm hypoechoic solid nodules with
micro calcification in the left lobe. Malign sitology was verified with fine needle
aspiration biopsy. Because of these findings total thyroidectomy was performed.
Microscopically, PTC was diagnosed without capsular, perineural and lenfovas-
cular invasion. The surgical board of tumor was negative. Lung metastases of
PTC was considered inoperable by thoracic surgery because the invasion of third
and fourth rib. The patient was discharged after treatment of iodine 131 therapy.
Conclusion
The incidence of DM related with PTC is %4-6. However, we did not find giant
lung metastases as our case when we did literature review. It was also interesting
that the local invasion in thyroidectomy materials was absent. As a result, the PTC
associated metastasis must be thought when we find giant mass in the lung.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1140
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP1141
Relation of F-18 FDG PET/CT positivity with tumor cytopathology and
molecular markers in malignant and benign thyroid tumors
Guzin Cakmak, Berna Imge Aydogan & Sevim Gullu
Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction
The role of F-18 FDG PET/CT in follow-up of differentiated thyroid cancer
(DTC) is well established. Molecular markers were shown to be related with
malignancy risk of thyroid nodules and prognosis of DTC. The goal of this study
was to assess the relation of molecular markers such as NIS, Galectin-3, PTEN,
Ki-67, p53 with PET positivity and malignancy of thyroid.
Methods/design
We evaluated patients who had 18-FDG uptake in thyroid gland at F-18 FDG
PET/CT and subsequently underwent total thyroidectomy. Pathology and PET-
CT reports were investigated retrospectively. Fifteen patients with 27 nodules
who had FDG uptake in thyroid were included. Twenty-one nodules were PET
positive. Thirteen nodules were malignant and eight were benign. Six malignant
nodules  of  these  patients  without
18-FDG  uptake  were  also  included.
Immunohistochemical staining with Galectin-3, NIS, PTEN, p53 andKi67 in
surgical specimens was performed.
Results
Six out of eight benign nodules (75%) were not stained with Galectin-3 and seven
(36.8%) of malignant nodules had negative Galectin-3 staining. Twelve nodules
stained moderately intense or intense with Galectin-3. NIS expression was
frequent and intense in elder people. Loss of PTEN expression was frequent in
malignant nodules. PTEN staining was not seen in 42.1% (n:8) of malignant and
12.5% (n:1) of benign nodules. Nodules were not stained for p53.F-18 FDG
positivity in malignant and benign nodules was not associated with Galectin-3,
NIS, Ki67 or PTEN expression.
Conclusion
FDG-PET positivity and malignancy risk were not associated with Galectin-3,
NIS, Ki67, PTEN and p53 expression. New studies are necessary for explaining
pathogenesis and role of molecular markers in development of FDG-PET positive
thyroid nodules.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1141
EP1142
Accuracy of fine-needle aspiration biopsy in Albanian experience
Ersida Golemi1,2, Dorina Ylli1,2, Mehdi Alimehmeti1,3, Gerond Hysi2,
Ermir Nelaj4, Edi Spahiu5 & Agron Ylli1,2
1
Service of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University
Hospital Center “Mother Teresa”, Tirana, Albania;2Neostyle Clinic, Tirana,
Albania;3Service of Anatomo-Pathology, University Hospital Center
“Mother Teresa”, Tirana, Albania;4Regional Hospital of Shkodra, Shkoder,
Albania;5Regional Hospital of Durres, Durres, Albania.
Background
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) is the gold standard in detecting thyroid
cancer. The overall incidence of thyroid cancer is 9-13% in patients with thyroid
nodule that are eligible for FNAB. If the sample taken is sufficient, a negative
FNA-B response eliminates the carcinoma risk in 98-99% of cases.
The aim of the study
To access the role of FNAB in the early diagnosis of thyroid cancer in Albania.
Materials and methods
This is a retrospective study involving 65 patients with thyroid cancer from 2008-
2015. All patient performed FNAB under ultrasonography, before surgery. Age,
gender, ultrasound characteristics, FNAB and post-surgery biopsy were studied.
Results
FNAB results: 42% was positive, 35% was indeterminate and 23% was negative.
The study revealed that 15 of 65 patients with thyroid cancer had a negative
response to cytoponction. In cases with negative FNAB, post-surgery biopsy
revealed 13 cases with papillary carcinoma, 2 cases with follicular carcinoma, no
cases with anaplastic or medullar carcinoma.
Conclusion
The study showed that, suspicious or positive cytology should be evaluated for
surgery. According to our results, since a negative FNAB response does not
exclude the possibility of cancer, an attentive evaluation of the FNAB result and
ultrasound pattern in very important before a pre operatory diagnosis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1142
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP1143
Medullary and papillary carcinoma of the thyroid gland occurring as a
collision tumour: a case report
Ziynet Alphan Uc1 & Suheyla Gorar2
1USAK Government Hospital, Endocrinology and Metabolic Disease
Department, USAK, Turkey;2Antalya, Training and Research Hospital,
Endocrinology and Metabolic Disease Department, Antalya, Turkey.
Introduction
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a relatively uncommon tumour of the
thyroid as compared with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Concurrent of
medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) in a
single patient is a rare.
Case
Forty-nine year-old male patient was referred to endocrinology for multinodular
goiter evaluation. He had no palpable nodules. There was no apparent family
history  of  endocrine  disorders  or  external  radiation  therapy.  The  thyroid
ultrasound showed an isoechoic nodule 9 mm in size, in the left lobe and two
hypoechoic nodes on the right lobe 4.4 and 7 mm in size, with accompanying
linear  calcification.  The  patient  was  euthyroid,  serum  calcium  level  and
antithyroid  autoantibodies  were  normal.  Fine  needle  aspirations  cytology
demonstrated a suspicious for PTC. The patient underwent total thyroidectomy.
The histology and immunohistochemistry showed multifocal papillary micro-
carcinoma
(5mm-  in  the  right  lobe/7mm  in  the  left  lobe)  and  medullary
microcarcinoma (3 mm-in the right lobe). Postoperatively calcitonin level ! 0.2
pg/ml, and thyroglobulin level !0.1 ng/ml. Radioiodine treatment was not
performed.  Urinary  metanephrines  levels  were  in  normal  ranges.  RET
protooncogene was found to be negative.
Discussion
The simultaneous occurrence of MTC and DTC in thyroid gland can be observed
in two main settings: a mixed tumor showing dual differentiation or a collision
tumor showing two separate different carcinomas. The latter category nodules
with MTC and PTC were detected distinct locations, seperated by normal thyroid
area. Pathogenesis of these tumors is unclear. The collision theory is suggested
that two independent tumors are located in the gland by coincidental. Other
possible explanations for these tumors the presence of RET protooncogene
mutation in both type thyroid cells. Recent studies and our case suggested that
MTC and PTC are usually coincidental and independent. Endocrinologist and
pathologist should to be alert in this condition.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1143
EP1144
Clinical evaluation and outcome of indeterminate (Thy 3)
thyroid nodules
Eleonora Monti, Margherita Balestra, Lorenzo Mortara, Stefano Gay,
Giorgia Pera, Alberto Adorno & Massimo Giusti
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, Genoa, Italy.
In thyroid nodules with indeterminate cytology, presurgical evaluations for risk
management comprise biochemical tests, ultrasonography (US), elastography-US
(USE), contrast-enhanced US (CEUS) and mutation analysis. The cytology of 130
Thy 3 nodules was reviewed according to the BTA 2014 classification. Nodules
were divided into Thy 3a and Thy 3f categories. Histology was available in 97
nodules. Malignancy was the final diagnosis in 19% of surgically treated nodules.
No significant difference in the risk of malignancy was found between Thy 3a
(26%) and Thy 3f (14%) nodules. Post-surgical histologic examination of the Thy
3a and Thy 3f nodules showed a higher incidence of Hurtle cell adenomas in Thy
3f (29%) than in Thy 3a (3%) nodules (PZ0.01). BRAF V600E mutation was
positive in some Thy 3a but not in any Thy 3f nodules (PZ0.04). Cut-off values
by ROC analysis from US (score), USE (ELX 2/1 strain index) and CEUS (time-
to-peak index and peak index) were similar in Thy 3a and Thy 3f nodules. Data
showed that malignancy can be suspected if the US score is O2, ELX 1/2 strain
index O1, time-to-peak index O1 and peak index !1. In a group of 24 revised
nodules (12 Thy 3a and 12 Thy 3f) the diagnostic power of cumulative pre-
surgical analysis by means of US, USE and CEUS showed high positive and
negative predictive values (83% and100%, respectively) for the presence of
malignancy in Thy 3a and Thy 3f nodules. In our series of revised Thy 3 nodules,
malignancy was low and displayed no significant differences between Thy 3a and
Thy 3f categories. The use of cut-offs based on histology as a reference, in both
Thy 3a and Thy 3f nodules, could reduce surgery. In mutation-negative Thy
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
3 nodules, observation should be the first choice when not all instrumental results
are suspect.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1144
EP1145
Brain metastasis from follicular thyroid carcinoma as first
manifestation of the disease
Rosa Márquez-Pardo, Lourdes García-García-Doncel, M Gloria
Baena-Nieto, Manuel Cayón-Blanco, Rosario López-Velasco &
Isabel Torres-Barea
Jerez Hospital, Jerez/Cádiz, Spain.
Introduction
The prevalence of brain metastasis from differentiated thyroid carcinoma is 1%.
Brain metastasis as the first manifestation of the disease is extremely uncommon.
Case report
We present a case of 44-year-old woman with headache and a tumor in right
parietal zone. The patient has had multinodular goiter for 15 years, with two
dominant  nodules  in  left  thyroid  lobe.  Both  of  them  were  isoechoic  with
hypoechoic halo and measured 2 cm. Fine-needle aspiration was benign and
without changes over time. Computed tomography scan (CT) and magnetic
resonance (MR) brain demonstrated a 6.2!6.5!5 cm right parietal lesion with
bone erosion (intracranial and extracranial component) mimicking a meningioma.
Laboratory tests were as followed: TSH 1.83 mcU/ml [0.3-5], T4L 0.94 ng/dl
[0.9-2.1], thyroglobulin
3207 ng/ml [0-80] and antithyroid antibodies were
negative.
Surgery of brain tumor was performed and histopathology revealed a 6!5.7!2
cm dural metastasis and a 4!2.8 cm skull metastasis of follicular thyroid
carcinoma.  Later,  total  thyroidectomy  detected  a
2 cm  well  differentiated
follicular thyroid carcinoma in left thyroid lobe, with a small capsular infiltration
and without vascular and lymph node invasion.
After that, radiotherapy and radioactive iodine therapy was administered to the
patient with an initial good response.
Conclusions
Brain  metastasis  from  differentiated  thyroid  carcinoma  are  rare  and  dural
metastasis from follicular thyroid carcinoma are exceptional, with only a few
published cases in the literature. In these cases the prognosis is poor, with a one
year survival rate. Although, the treatment is controversial, nowadays brain
surgery and radiotherapy are the best options.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1145
EP1146
Coexisting papillary thyroid carcinoma and renal cell carcinoma:
4 cases
Mehmet Celik1, Semra Ayturk1, Buket Yilmaz Bulbul1, Nuray Can2,
Ebru Tastekin2, Atakan Sezer3, Funda Ustun4 & Sibel Guldiken1
1Trakya University Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolizm, Edirne, Turkey;2Trakya University Medical Faculty,
Department of Pathology, Edirne, Turkey;3Trakya University Medical
Faculty, Department of Surgery, Edirne, Turkey;4Trakya University
Medical Faculty, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Edirne, Turkey.
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) constitutes
85% of all differentiated thyroid
cancers. PTC is usually sporadic, but may occur in a familial form. Familial
cancer  syndromes  such  as  Cowden’s  syndrome  and  familial  adenomatous
polyposis are associated with PTC. Lal et al. recently published a study in which
subsequent thyroid cancer was most common among the patients with renal cell
cancer (RCC). RCC is a common malignancy of uroepithelial region, which
constitutes  about
3%  of  all  adult  malignancies.  We  presented
4
cases
consecutively diagnosed with PTC and RCC within 12 months (Table). 3 cases
with BRAF positivity had lymph node metastasis. The BRAF gene is located on
chromosome 7. BRAF is a signaling protein downstream of Ras that activates the
MAP-kinase pathway and implicated in cell differentiation and proliferation.
Mutations of this gene have been found in cancers, including non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, colorectal cancer, malignant melanoma, PTC and lung carcinoma,
while few studies reported RCC cases with BRAF mutation. In 2016, Natasha
Banerjee et al. reported a case with metastatic RCC and BRAF mutation, in whom
a good  clinical  outcome  was  achieved  following  BRAF  inhibition.  BRAF
positivity observed in 3 of our cases suggests that further studies are required on a
common mutation that exists in RCC and PTC.
CASE 1
CASE 2
CASE 3
CASE 4
Age
64
48
56
67
Gender
Male
Male
Male
Male
Clinic
Euthyroid
Euthyroid
Hyperthyroid
Hyperthyroid
PTC-variant
Classic and
Classic and
Classic and   Classic,
follicular
follicular
oncocytic
follicular
and onco-
cytic
PTC-grade    pT1a -pN1
pT1a -pNx    pT3a -pN1
pT4a -pN1
Focality
Multifocal
Multifocal
Multifocal
Multifocal
Metastasis
C
K
C
C
BRAF
V600E (C)
Not analyzed  V600E (C)    V600E (C)
mutation
RAI (I-131)
C
K
C
C
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1146
EP1147
Multi-directional approach for mean platelet volume in differentiated
thyroid cancer
Hilal Kiziltunc Ozmen1, Seda Askin2, Eda Simsek3, Ayse Carlioglu4 &
Senay Arikan4
1Department of Radiation Oncology, Ataturk University Medical School,,
Erzurum, Turkey;2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Ataturk
University Medical School, Erzurum, Turkey;3Department of Otorhino-
laryngology, Regional Training and Research Hospital, Erzurum, Turkey;
4Department of Endocrinology, Regional Training and Research Hospital,
Erzurum, Turkey.
Background
Differential thyroid cancer
(DTC) is classified into papillary, follicular and
papillary  micro  thyroid  cancer.  Also,  mean  platelet  volume
(MPV)  is  an
independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease. The aim of the present study
was to investigate MPV values in DTC patients.
Materials and methods
The levels of MPV were assessed in 183 patients with DTC 44 papillary thyroid
cancer (mean age 43.G13.9) 34 papillary micro thyroid cancer (mean age 43.1G
10.6), 28 follicular cancer (mean age 46.9G12.5) and 77 control subjects (mean
age 47.5G5.9). Patient group and the control group were matched for age, BMI.
None of the study subject had hypertension, radiotherapy and dyslipidemia. All
the study subjects were investigated by platelet and biochemical parameters.
Results
Serum MPV levels were found to be increased in papillary thyroid cancer (PTC)
(8.87G0.99), papillary micro thyroid cancer (PmTC) (8.82G1.39) and follicular
thyroid cancer (FTC) (8.69G0.76) patients than in the control group (PZ0.000,
PZ0.000 and PZ0.001, respectively). It was similar between the three groups.
The MPV levels were significantly positively correlated with C-reactive protein
(rZ0.247; PZ0.043), waist circumference (rZ0.195; PZ0.261), thyroglobuline
(rZ0.246; PZ0.03), gamma glutamyl transferase (rZ0.024; PZ0.762), tumor
size (rZ0.209; PZ0.047) and RDW (rZ0.207; PZ0.005) which cardiac risk
factors.  The  multiple  regression  analysis  of  MPV  and  other  risk  factors
was  performed.  Age,  CRP,  gender,  total  cholesterol,  were  independent
predictive factors of MPV. Adjustment for other these factors did not alter
these relative risks.
Conclusions
Our results suggest that patients with DTC have higher MPV levels even than
healty controls. As higher MPV levels are close related with cardiovasculer
diseases DTC patients have greater risk of atherothrombotic complications than
controls. Furthermore our study suggest that MPV might be a good follow
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
criterium in DTC patients because of its positive correlation with the tumor size
and thyroglobulin
Keywords: mean  platelet volume, papillary micro thyroid cancer, papillary
thyroid carcinoma, follicular thyroid cancer, cardiovascular risk
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1147
EP1148
Preoperative predictors of malignancy in lesions classified as
BETHESDA IV
Sefika Burcak Polat1, Berna Ogmen1, Husniye Baser1, Nuran Sungu3,
Gurkan Dumlu2, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1
Yildirim Beyazit University, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,
Endocrinology and Metabolism Department, Ankara, Turkey;2Yildirim
Beyazit University, Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, General
Surgery Department, Ankara, Turkey;3Yildirim Beyazit University,
Ataturk Education and Research Hospital, Pathology Department, Ankara,
Turkey.
Background
Differential diagnosis of a thyroid nodule is difficult if it is a follicular lesion.
Follicular  lesions  include  follicular  adenoma
(FA)  or  a  malign  neoplasm
(follicular  cancer
(FC)  or  follicular  variant  of  papillary  thyroid  carcinoma
(FVPTC)). Cytology can’t separate benign from malignant condition in follicular
lesions. Differential diagnosis is important because patients often undergo less
than ideal interventions, such as a total thyroidectomy for a benign lesion or
require completion thyroidectomy after a lobectomy for a malignant nodule.
Herein we aimed to search whether there is a clinical or ultrasonographic marker
discriminating malign lesions from benign ones.
Method
Eighty consecutive patients with an operated follicular thyroid neoplasm at a
tertiary hospital from 2007 to 2014 were reviewed. Age, gender, symptoms,
history,  physical  findings,  nodule  size,  sonographic,  cytologic,  and  final
pathologic results were recorded. Malignant and benign groups were compared
according to preoperative clinical and imaging features.
Results
34 of 102 nodules were malignant where as 68 were benign. Gender distribution,
baseline thyroid function tests and thyroid autoantibody positivity were similar
between the benign and malignant groups. Family history of differentiated thyroid
cancer
(DTC) was significantly  higher in the malignant group
(PZ0.002).
Regarding to ultrasonographic parameters, nodule volume and vascularity were
significantly greater in the malignant nodules (PZ0.04 and 0.008, respectively)
Presence of microcalcification/irregular macrocalcification was also higher in the
malignant group compared to benign group (PZ0.017). When we subdivided
malignant nodules as FVPTC (18 lesions) and FC (16 lesions), microcalfication
was significantly more common in FVPTC (PZ0.022).
Conclusion
Family history and certain ultrasonographic parameters might be helpful in
preoperative  differentiation  of  benign  and  malignant  follicular  neoplasms.
A combination ofthose with both FNA and molecular results may help us to
decide management of patients with follicular thyroid lesion.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1148
EP1149
Burkitt lymphoma of the thyroid (A rapidly growing painless thyroid
mass during pregnancy)
Dhiya Eddine Bellarbi1, Hafsa Si-youcef1, Said Azzoug1,
Mustapha Amalou2, Fethi Merad Boudia2 & Farida Chentli1
1Department of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Bab El Oued Teaching
Hospital, Algiers, Algeria;2Department of Surgery, Bab El Oued Teaching
Hospital, Algiers, Algeria.
Introduction
Primary thyroid lymphomas (PTL) are rare tumors, accounting for 2.5% of all
non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas and fewer than 2% of all malignant thyroid tumors.
Primary thyroid’s Burkitt lymphoma represents a very unusual type of PTL. Only
very few cases of primary thyroid’s Burkitt lymphoma have been reported during
pregnancy.
Observation
We present a 30 years old female patient who developed a rapidly enlarging
painless neck mass. This mass was noticed by the patient few days after a severe
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
flue at 20th week of pregnancy. We received our patient at 29th week and 4 days
of her first pregnancy. She had no other diseases or family history of thyroid
disease. Physical examination revealed an enlarged thyroid gland. Compressive
signs  were  limited  to  respiratory  distress.  Ultrasound  of  the  neck  showed
increased dimensions of thyroid gland. Her thyroid function tests were normal.
Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies were positive. Fine needle aspiration biopsy
within the thyroid gland was compatible with thyroiditis. Compression was
objected on MRI cervical examination which revealed a voluminous goiter with
discreet lamination of the trachea. So she had a prophylactic ceasarean delivery of
a healthy, premature male infant at 32 weeks of gestation. Urgent thyroidectomy
was performed and the diagnosis of thyroid’s Burkitt lymphoma was made on
pathology. Subsequent staging procedures included CT imaging of the neck, chest
and abdomen which revealed nodes enlargement in the chest. Chemotherapy was
initiated six weeks after surgery.
Conclusion
Thyroid’s Burkitt lymphoma is rare; its occurrence during pregnancy is even
rarer. Its diagnosis and management is difficult. A multidisciplinary team is
tremendously important in order to take the right decisions to save both the baby
and the mother.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1149
EP1150
Can we predict malignancy in AUS/FLUS by measuring TSH?
Ricardo Rodrigues Marques1, Ana Alves Rafael1, Francisco Sousa Santos2,
Silvia Sofia Silva1, Joa˜o Sequeira Duarte2 & Luís Viana Fernandes1
1CHLO, EPE - Hospital Egas Moniz - Department Cirurgia II, Lisboa,
Portugal;2CHLO, EPE - Hospital Egas Moniz - Department Endocrinolo-
gia, Lisboa, Portugal.
Background
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is an important test for triaging patients with
thyroid nodules and differentiating benign from malignant disease. According to
Bethesda System Classification, the rate of AUS/FLUS is between 3-6% of all
FNA. The malignancy risk is of 5-15%. TSH levels might be associated to the
likelihood of malignancy in thyroid nodules according to some studies. Our aim
was to establish a possible correlation between TSH level and malignancy of
AUS/FLUS.
Methods
Retrospective study using SPSS.
Results
The authors reviewed a total of 2891 patients from January 2012 to December
2014. There were 564 (15.9%) AUS/FLUS in 3557 thyroid FNAs performed. The
malignancy risk was 9.6%. The rate of carcinomas on operated patients was 30%.
From a total of 180 performed surgeries, there were 54 carcinomas. TSH value
was determined in carcinomas. 11 were excluded because of missing data or
because of patients under thyroid hormonal replacement before surgery. On the
43 remaining patients correlation between AUS/FLUS and TSH values was
established. The mean value for TSH in carcinomas versus control group (benign
lesions) was 1.74 vs 1.45 (P value Z0.117).
Conclusion
We could not establish a correlation between TSH level and the likelihood of
carcinomas in AUS/FLUS in our series. A bigger data may be necessary to get
statistically significant results.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1150
EP1151
Neutrophil-Lymphocyte Ratio (Nlr) and Platelet -Lymphocyte Ratio
(Plr) may be superior to C-Reactive Protein (Crp) for predicting the
occurrence of differentiated thyroid cancer
Sevilay Ozmen1, Ozge Timur2, Ilknur Calik1, Konca Altinkaynak3,
Elif Zipak4, Eda Simsek5, Faruk Yildiz2, Hakan Sevimli2, Hakan Gozcu2,
Abdulmuttalip Arslan2 & Ayse Carlioglu6
1Region Training and Research Hospital, Department of Pathology,
Erzurum, Turkey;2Region Training and Research Hospital, Department of
Internal Medicine, Erzurum, Turkey;3Region Training and Research
Hospital, Department of Biochemistry, Erzurum, Turkey;4Region Training
and Research Hospital, Department of Anesthesiology, Erzurum, Turkey;
5Region Training and Research Hospital, Department of Otorhinolaryn-
gology, Erzurum, Turkey;6Region Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Endocrinology, Erzurum, Turkey.
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Aim
Neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and platelet-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) are
prognostic markers of differentiated thyroid cancers. In our study we evaluated
NLR, PLR and C-reactive protein for predicting the occurence of differentiated
thyroid cancer. This is the first study that compares NLR and PLR to C-reactive
protein indifferantiated thyroid cancer not only papillary cancer but also folliculer
cancer.
Materials and Method
This study includes 51 papillary carcinoma, 42 papillary microcarcinoma and 31
folliculer carcinoma patients attending to our outpatient Endocrinology Clinic at
Erzurum Region Training and Research Hospital between 2009 and 2014. The
control group include 50 age, sex and body mass index matched healty subjects.
Blood counts and CRP were measured at the day before surgery. Thyroglobulin
was measured after 6 months of operation.
Results
There were positive correlations between tumor diameter, age, white blood cell
(WBC) and thyroglobulin levels. There were also positive correlation between
NLR, PLR and CRP levels.
Conclusion
In our study we found out that higher NLR and PLR was associated with higher
levels of thyroglobulin which indicates worse survival. CRP levels were also
associated with poorer tumor profile but the determining rate was lower according
to ROC analysis.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1151
EP1152
Local classification of differentiated thyroid cancer: does it help to
discriminate the response to treatment?
Francisca Gajardo2, Cecilia Pereira1, Cristobal Campos2,
Vieroska Inostroza2, Erika Diaz1, Pamela Invernizzi1, Felix Vasquez1,
Nicolas Crisosto2, Amanda Ladron de Guevara2, Paola Hernandez1 &
Miguel Dominguez1
1Unidad de Endocrinologia Hospital San Juan de Dios, Santiago, Chile;
2Universidad de Chile Sede Occidente, Santiago, Chile.
Introduction
The prediction of the risk of recurrence in differentiated thyroid cancer (dtc) in
chile is different from ata. The use of the stimulated thyroglobulin (tg) post-
surgery in the prediction of the risk is controversial. We present a cohort applying
a new local protocol that includes the tg for supporting the discrimination of the
patients for offer low doses or radio iodine.
Objective
Asses if the local risk classification (lc) allow us to discriminate the response to
the treatment (rt).
Method
Analysis of medical records from the patients with total thyroidectomy for dtc
during 2013. Compared the lc with de ata risk stratification scale. We evaluated
the response to the treatment after a year of evolution according with the levels of
suppressed and stimulated tg and images. The results were divided in excellent or
acceptable/incomplete.
Results
96 patients were analysed. The thyroidectomy was total in a 100%. Histological
type: 92.7% papillary. 68.7% received radio iodine in doses from 30 to 150 mci;
in the group of very low risk lc no one went to ablation. Rt was excellent in 74%,
acceptable in 20% and incomplete in 6.2%. Using the cohort value of the tg lower
than 2 ng/dl, we get un lr of 0.22 for predicting a good response.
Conclutions
In the local classification all the patients with very low risk presented excellent
response to the treatment, allowing discriminate better this group.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1152
EP1153
Thyroid cancer in a patient with neurofibromatosis type 1:
von recklinghausen disease
Ioannis Karaitianos1, Panagiotis Athanassiou2, Christiana Tsomidou3 &
Ifigenia Kostoglou-Athanassiou4
1Department of Surgery, St. Savvas Hospital, Athens, Greece;2Department
of Rheumatology, St. Paul’s Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece;3Department of
Medicine, Hippocrates Hospital, Piraeus, Greece;4Department of
Endocrinology, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Introduction
Neurofibromatosis type 1 or von Recklinghausen disease is a systemic hereditary
disease characterized by disorders regarding the skin, neural and skeletal systems.
Osteoporosis is one of the skeletal manifestations of neurofibromatosis type 1,
being  associated  with  increased  fracture  risk.  Neurofibromatosis  type
1 is
associated with a propensity for the development of cancer, breast cancer in
particular being associated with neurofibromatosis type 1.
Aim
The aim was to present the case of a patient with neurofibromatosis type 1 who
developed breast and thyroid cancer and was diagnosed with osteoporosis.
Case report
A female patient, aged 47, with neurofibromatosis type 1 developed breast cancer
at the age of 45 and had surgery and radiotherapy. The patient had a mother with
neurofibromatosis type 1, who had breast cancer and had died from metastatic
generalized breast cancer. A year later the patient presented with a nodule in the
thyroid gland. Fine needle aspiration biopsy was performed and revealed the
presence of papillary thyroid cancer. Near total thyroidectomy was performed and
histology was positive for a papillary thyroid cancer. The patient complained for
diffuse musculoskeletal pain, 25(OH)D3  levels and bone mineral density were
measured. 25(OH)D3 levels were 20 ng/ml, T score was K2.9. Ibandronate was
administered at a dose of 150 mg once monthly along with calcium and vitamin D
orally. A year later bone mineral density was measured, T score being K2.7,
compatible with improvement in bone mineral density.
Conclusions
Neurofibromatosis type 1 is a systemic hereditary disease characterized by a
tendency  for  the  development  of  cancer.  Recently,  osteoporosis  has  been
described as one of the features of the disease. The case of a patient has been
described with neurofibromatosis type 1 and osteoporosis who improved after
treatment with risedronate (Benlidayi et al. 2015). The patient described herein
was also given bisphosphonates with a good therapeutic response.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1153
EP1154
Collision thyroid tumors among patients diagnosed with thyroid
carcinomas
Gesthimani Mintziori, Fotini Adamidou, Despoina Selalmatzidou &
Marina Kita
Department of Endocrinology, Ippokratio General Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece.
Introduction
Collision thyroid tumors are defined as independent and histologically distinct
tumors that coexist within the thyroid gland. Collision thyroid tumors are rare and
their prevalence is unknown.
Methods
A retrospective, registry-based study was performed by reviewing the electronic
medical  records  of  the  Department  of  Endocrinology,  Ippokratio  General
Hospital of Thessaloniki, Greece. All patients with thyroidectomy and thyroid
cancer diagnosis were assessed to detect the prevalence of collision thyroid
tumors.
Results
In total, 305 patients (nZ305) were diagnosed with thyroid cancer. Two hundred
sixteen (nZ216) patients were diagnosed with papillary thyroid carcinoma, 35
patients (nZ35) were diagnosed with follicular thyroid carcinoma, 41 patients
(nZ41) were diagnosed with medullary thyroid cancer and 13 patients (nZ13)
were diagnosed with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. From the 305, collition
thyroid tumors were only found in 3 patients (0.98%). The first patient presented
with multinodular goiter with calcifications. The initial FNA showed Hurthle Cell
Carcinoma, whereas pathology findings revealed co-existence of myeloid and
papillary (2-focal) thyroid cancer. RET testing was negative. The second patient
presented with primary hyperparathyroidism and it was unilateral lobectomy that
revealed micro-papillary thyroid cancer co-existing with micro-myeloid thyroid
cancer. RET testing was negative. The third patient underwent thyreoidectomy
due to rapid increase of the nodule’s size although the initial FNA was negative
for  malignancy.  Pathology  findings  revealed  co-existence  of  myeloid  and
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
papillary (2-focal) thyroid cancer and genetic testing for RET was positive for
the polymorphisms G691S in exon 11 and S904S in exon 15. Of note, the first
patient was also diagnosed with bilateral adrenal incidentalomas whereas the
second with bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and the third with unilateral adrenal
incidentaloma.
Conclusion
Collision thyroid tumors are a rare finding in patients diagnosed with thyroid
carcinomas. It has been suggested that activation of a common tumorigenic
pathway takes place, however existing evidence is limited.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1154
EP1155
Second primary malignancies in patients with differentiated thyroid
carcinoma
Agata Baldys-Waligorska, Maciej Kolodziej, Monika Buziak-Bereza &
Alicja Hubalewska-Dydejczyk
Chair and Clinic of Endocrinology, Jagiellonian University Medical
College, Krakow, Poland.
Introduction
It has been shown that thyroid cancer has a significant correlation with cancers
originated from other organs. The aim of this study was to investigate the
association between synchronous primary cancers in patients with thyroid cancer.
Material and Method
A retrospective analysis of medical records of 560 thyroid cancer patients treated in
the years 2007-2013 and followed up over 2-8 years, was performed. In 38 patients
(6.7%), 5 male patients, 33 females (mean age 65.4G13.5 years,) of the analyzed
group other primary malignant neoplasms were observed. Among these 30 patients
follicular thyroid cancer was stated in 7 and papillary cancer - in 31 patients.
Within the TNM system, thyroid cancer classification of these patients varied
between in pT1aN0M0 and pT3mN1M1. Two female patients with pT1aN0M0
papillary cancer did not receive complementary radioiodine treatment.
Results
In 36 patients concurrently two malignant neoplasms occurred. In two female
patients multiple concurrent primary neoplasms were stated: thyroid cancer with
breast and ovary cancers, and thyroid cancer with kidneyand uterus cancers and
pituitary adenoma. In the studied group breast cancer was the most frequent (14
patients), uterus cancer (4 patients), brain tumour (3 patients), blood malignancies
and lung cancer (4 patients), kidney cancer (3), NET and melanoma (2 patients).
Six patients were diagnosed first with thyroid cancer and next with breast cancer
and in six patients breast cancer preceded thyroid cancer diagnosis and treatment.
In two patients synchronous cancers were stated. During follow up one female
patient died of NET of unknown origin with liver metastases.
Conclusions
It appears that female patients with thyroid cancer are more susceptible to breast
cancer than the general population, therefore particular attention should be paid to
diagnosing breast and thyroid nodules in these patients. The genetic background
of concurrent malignant neoplasms requires further investigation.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1155
EP1156
A case of thyroid cancer followed by metachronous cancers and a
pituitary tumour
Agata Baldys-Waligorska, Anna Skalniak, Jakub Pie˛tkowski &
Anna Sowa-Staszczak
Chair and Clinic of Endocrinology, Krakow, Poland.
Introduction
Based on cancer registries, the risk of second primary malignancies in patients
with DTC increases by 30%. In our case report we aimed at understanding the
patomechanism of metachronous primary tumours in patients with thyroid cancer.
Case
In a 71-year old female surgery of nodular goitre (1988), followed by papillary
thyroid cancer (pT3NxMx) surgery (2008) and complementary 131-I treatment
(2009), were performed. In diagnostic WBS (2010) no pathologic 131-I uptake
and no enlargement of lymph nodes were stated. Tg concentration after rhTSH
stimulation  was
10.7
ng/ml.  Consecutive
131-I  therapy  followed
(2010).
Endometrial cancer, pT1cNxMx, was surgically removed (2011), followed by
tele- and brachytherapy. In 2012 a small left kidney tumour and a tumour in the
lower left lung were seen in her chest CT. Following nephrectomy, clear cell
cancer infiltrating the capsula was established. Resection of lower lobe of left lung
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
followed (2013) and found to be endometrial cancer metastasis. The patient
underwent chemotherapy (6 paclitaxel and carboplatin cycles, 2013). Due to
increase in thyroglobulin concentration, WBS was performed (2014), with no
pathologic 131-I uptake, rhTSH-stimulated TSH (351.9 uU/ml) and Tg (13.8
ng/ml). PET/CT showed 18F-FDG accumulation in a pituitary tumour (SUVmax
21.7). A large (40!30!45 mm) intra- and extrasellar tumour was confirmed in
brain CT, with penetration of cavernous sinuses and compression of optic chiasm
and inferior frontal gyri. A wait-and-watch strategy was suggested by consulting
neurosurgeon due  to multiple  malignancy,  with emergency neurosurgery  if
necessary. No pathologic mutations were found in AIP, MEN1, p53, PTEN and
CHEK2 genes. Diagnostic follow up for pituitary tumour is under way.
Conclusions
To elucidate the genetic background of metachronous neoplasms, molecular
screening is necessary. Due to possible concurrence of melanoma, breast, prostate
or kidney cancer with thyroid cancer, careful screening of the neck of patients
with such tumours is recommended.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1156
EP1157
Benign and malignant thyroid gland diseases in the patients with
primary hyperparathyroidism
Mehmet Celik1, Sibel Guldiken1, Semra Ayturk1, Buket Yilmaz Bulbul1,
Ebru Tastekin2, Nuray Can2, Atakan Sezer3, Funda Ustun4 &
Ahmet Kucukarda1
1Trakya University Medical Faculty, Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolizm, Edirne, Turkey;2Trakya University Medical Faculty,
Department of Pathology, Edirne, Turkey;3Trakya University Medical
Faculty, Department of Surgery, Edirne, Turkey;4Trakya University
Medical Faculty, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Edirne, Turkey.
Aim
This study aimed to evaluate concurrently detected thyroid pathologies in the
patients who underwent surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism.
Materials and Methods
In this study, we retrospectively analyzed the files of the patients who underwent
surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism between 2012-2015. Pre-operative and
post-operative laboratory examination results and the results of pre-operative
radiological and nuclear medicine studies of the patients were retrospectively
recorded.
Findings
A total number of 41 patients with primary hyperparathyroidism were divided
into two groups as the group with primary hyperparathyroidism and benign
thyroid pathology (21 patients) and the group with primary hyperparathyroidism
and malignant thyroid pathology (20 patients). In the group 1, 18 and 3 of 21
subjects were females and males, respectively. The patient group 2 included 15
male and 5 female patients. The mean age of the subjects were found to be 55.6
and 53.9 years in group 1 and group 2, respectively. Both groups were matched
fora ge and gender. In terms of thyroid pathology, 20 of 41 patients (48.7%) who
underwent total thyroidectomy for primary hyperparathyroidism were found to
have thyroid papillary carcinoma, while benign pathologic conditions were
detected in 21 (51.3%) individuals.
Conclusion
Co-occurrence of thyroid diseases and primary hyperparathyroidism is common.
Therefore, all patients should be pre-operatively evaluated for the presence of
thyroid pathology to determine the technique of parathyroid surgery.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1157
EP1158
Hyalinizing trabecular tumor of thyroid in a patient with suspicious for
papillary cancer in fine needle aspiration biopsy: a case report
Abbas Ali Tam1, Cevdet Aydin1, Didem Ozdemir1, Hayriye Tatli Dogan2,
Birol Korukluoglu3, Reyhan Ersoy1 & Bekir Cakir1
1Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey;2Ataturk Training and
Research Hospital, Department of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey;3Ataturk
Training and Research Hospital, Department of General Surgery, Ankara,
Turkey.
Introduction
Hyalinizing trabecular tumor is a very rare neoplasm of thyroid and can be
misinterpreted as papillary or medullary cancer in fine needle aspiration biopsy
(FNAB).
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
Case report
Multinodular goiter was detected in a 65 years old woman using metformin and
L-thyroxine for impaired blood glucose and Hashimoto thyroiditis, respectively.
FNAB was performed in two nodules and reported as suspicious for malignancy
and benign. She underwent total thyroidectomy and a lesion with fragmented thin
fibrous capsule was detected. The lesion was not including colloid and was
characterized by eosinophilic, polygonal and elongated cells with wide cytoplasm
and oval, elongated and irregular nucleus. There was also straight nuclear notchs
and pseudoinclusions. Narrow hyalinized stroma including thin vascular structure
was present between trabecules. There was no capsular or vascular invasion.
Cytokeratin 19, HBME-1 and calcitonin were negative and TTF-1 was highly
positive with immunocytochemical staining. Ki 67 proliferation index was 1-2%.
No staining with BRAF VE-1 antibody was observed. The lesion was diagnosed
as hyalinizing trabecular tumor depending on morphological and immunocyto-
chemical findings.
Conclusion
It is difficult to differentiate hyalinizing trabecular tumor of thyroid and papillary
thyroid cancer due to similarities in morphology and origin of two tumors, and
FNAB may be misinterpreted as papillary thyroid cancer. Diagnosing hyalinizing
trabecular tumor of thyroid which is benign or has low malignant potential and
which  can  be  treated  by  lobectomy  will  certainly  prevent  patient  from
overtreatment.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1158
EP1159
Case of papillary carcinoma occasionally found in young patient and the
importance of immediate radical therapy
Natia Katamadze, Iakob Burnadze & Nino Butbaia
V. Iverieli Endocrinology, Metabology, Dietology center “ENMEDIC”,
Tbilisi, Georgia.
Introduction
The number of thyroid cancer is progressively increasing and the majority of
those diagnosis are papillary thyroid cancer- the most common type of thyroid
cancer. Females are more likely to have thyroid cancer. Thyroid cancer can occur
in any age group, although it is most common after age 30, and its aggressiveness
increases significantly in older patients. Thyroid cancer does not always cause
symptoms. Often the first sign of thyroid cancer is a thyroid nodule.
Case report
27 years old woman attended our clinic with the complains of fatigue, tachycardia
especially at night time. She had no other complains. The patient was sent from
cardiologist to check thyroid function. 1 year ago, during pregnancy her thyroid
function and thyroid ultrasonography was normal. We performed laboratory
studies: TSH 1.57(0.4-4.0) FT4 1.14(0.89-1.76) antiTPO 126.23(0-60) antiTG
126.23(0-60.0);  Thyroid  ultrasonography  was  performed:  in  the  right  lobe
hypoechogenic solid nodule 5!5!6mm was found. As the nodule had fibrotic
areas Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA) was performed. The conclusion was TIR3A:
low-risk indeterminate lesion (we use classification provided by Italian society of
anatomic  pathology  and  diagnostic  cytology)  We  suggested  chirurgical
intervention, but she was against. We aimed to recheck her hormonal status
and ultrasonography after 3 months. So she attended our clinic once again
after 3 months, hormonal status was within normal range, the size of nodule
was 5!5!8 mm and enlarged lymph nodes were found. Once again FNA was
performed and the conclusion was TIR5- Papillary carcinoma. So she was
immediately sent to radical treatment. Total thyroidectomy, lymph dissection
was performed.
Conclusion
With this case we want to say that when TIR3 is diagnosed it is necessary to
perform immediately chirurgical intervention in order to prevent metastatic lesion
and the progression of disease.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1159
EP1160
Three siblings with familial nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma
Muhammad Rashid, Muhammad Naeemul Haq, Najmul Islam &
Zareen Kiran
Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.
Introduction
Nonmedullary carcinoma of thyroid is most common of thyroid carcinoma with
familial  predisposition  and  very  low  incidence.We  describe  cases  of  three
brothers with familial nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma diagnosed over a span of
six years clinical follow up.
Case
58 years male with swelling in neck for 5 days. On examination he had left thyroid
nodule.  Ultrasound  thyroid  showed  multinodular  goiter  while  fine  needle
aspiration cytology (FNAC) left lobe revealed follicular lesion. Patient was
planned for left lobectomy but perioperative frozen section of left lobe showed
follicular carcinoma with capsular invasion so total thyroidectomy was perfomed.
Histopathology of right lobe thyroid showed papillary carcinoma of thyroid. As
disease has familial tendency, his three years younger brother asymptomatic
underwent ultrasound thyroid for screening purpose. His ultrasound showed
multinodular goiter, FNAC revealed features suspicious of papillary carcinoma
thyroid. Patient underwent total thyroidectomy with central neck dissection and
histopathology showed classical papillary thyroid carcinoma with lymph node
metastasis. Patients youngest brother had complains of chronic urticaria with
elevated thyroid antibodies (Anti TPO of 695.10 normal less than 35 and Anti
Thyroglobulin of 29.50 normal less than 40) with TSH 1.80, T4 8.80 (4.6-10.5).
In view of strong family history he was advised ultrasound thyroid which showed
multinodular  goitre  and  FNAC  revealed  papillary  carcinoma  thyroid.  He
underwent Total thyroidectomy with bilateral selective neck dissection and
histopathology confirmed papillary carcinoma classic variant with lymph node
metastasis. None of the brothers had exposure to radiations or other malignancies.
Conclusion
In conclusion our cases describes the importance of high index of suspicion and a
detailed family history when evaluating patients with nonmedullary thyroid
cancers.
Keywords: Familial nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1160
EP1161
Differentiated thyroid papillary carcinoma with cerebellar metastasis,
case report
Elif Turan1, Ahmet Kaya2, Mustafa Kulaksizoglu2, Aysegul Zamani3 &
Sumeyye Kozacioglu4
1Department of Endocrinology, Medical Faculty, Bozok University, Bozok
University, Yozgat, Turkey;2Department of Endocrinology, Meram
Medical Faculty, Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey;
3Department of Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Necmettin Erbakan
University, Konya, Turkey;4Department of Pathology, Meram Medical
Faculty, Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey.
Introduction
Differentiated thyroid cancer has usually good prognosis and long-term survival.
Distant metastasis ratio is 5-15%. Metastasis to cerebrum, breast, liver, kidney,
muscle, and skin is relatively rare. The study of molecular mechanisms of PTC
has demonstrated that BRAFV600E gene mutation is a significant event in the
process of this disease.
Case
55-year-old-male  patient  who  had  multinodular  goiter  showed  malignant
cytology  in  fine-needle-biopsy.  Total  thyroidectomy,  neck  dissection  were
performed. Pathology  was consistent  with PTC, diameter was
4.5 cm  with
vascular  and perineural invasion,
11/13  lymph  nodes  had  PTC  infiltration.
Bilateral cervical, mediastinal lymph node, bilateral multiple areas in lung, C4-C5
vertebrae had increased FDG uptake in PET/CT after surgery. Second-look neck
dissection was performed. 33/46 lymph nodes had PTC infiltration. 200 mCi of
RAI ablation therapy was given [TSH: 82 mIU/ml (0.34-5.6), thyroglobulin:
38 817 ng/ml (1.15-35), anti-thyroglobulin:107 IU/ml (0-115)]. On whole body
scanning (WBS), radioactivity was detected in neck, mediastinum and both lungs.
Because of high thyroglobulin levels, RAI ablation treatment with the dose of
250 mCi was planned after one year of first ablation. On WBS, radioactivity was
detected in region of mediastinal, axillary, hemithoraxes and liver. Patient did not
come to follow up for one year, then he admitted to emergency department with
headache and vomiting. 37!47 mm mass with solid-cystic components in right
side  of  cerebellum  was  detected  in  cranial-MRI.  Patient  was  referred  to
neurosurgery  clinic.  There  were  multiple  lymph  nodes  with  pathological
dimension in both axillary and mediastinal areas and multiple metastatic foci
existed in bilateral lower lungs, in liver and 8!5 cm in left, 3.5!2.5 cm in right
adrenal glands were consistent with metastases in CT. Cerebellar mass was
excised. PTC infiltration was reported and BRAF V600E mutation was analyzed
in cerebellar metastatic mass.
Conclusion
BRAFV600E mutations in PTC are associated with extrathyroidal spread, lymph
node metastasis, tumor recurrence and mortality.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1161
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
EP1162
The efficacy and safety of sorafenib treatment on iodide refractory
metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinomas
Pinar Sisman1, Mustafa Suveran1, Ahmet Bilgehan Sahin2, Ozen Oz Gul1,
Soner Cander3, Erdinc Erturk1 & Canan Ersoy1
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Uludag University Medical
School, Bursa, Turkey;2Department of Internal Medicine, Uludag
University Medical School, Bursa, Turkey;3Department of Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Bursa Yukses Ihtisas Training and Research Hospital,
Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction
Differentiated thyroid carcinomas (DTC) are originated from thyroid follicular
epithelial cells and comprises %90 of all thyroid carcinomas. Researches indicate
that  sorafenib  is  more  efficacious  than  other  chemotherapeutic  agents  on
metastatic iodide refractory DTCs.
Material and methods
In our center, between 2013 and 2015, sorafenib was applied to six patients who
had iodide refractory metastatic DTC. Five of the patients were female. The mean
age at diagnosis was 68.6. Minimum 150, maximum 800 mCi RAI treatment were
administered to the patients were applied after total thyroidectomy.
Results
After sorafenib treatment, on the follow-up skin rashes were the most frequent
adverse  effect  and  followed  by  hypertension,  high  ventricular  rate  atrial
fibrillation and esophagitis. Skin lesions were mild and occurred on the first
month of the treatment, after dose reduction symptoms resolved by 1 month. One
patient had died of pericardial effusion. The response rates were evaluated
according to ‘response evaluation criteria in solid tumors RECIST’. Progressive
disease, stable disease, and partial response were observed in three patients, one
patient and one patient, respectively. One patient has not been assessed by
imaging.
Discussion
Literature indicates that the adverse effects occur at the early phase, after reducing
the dose or quitting, symptoms resolve and by the time patients’ drug tolerance
increase. Younger patients’ drug compliance is higher. In our patients, adverse
effects occurred in the first month consistent with literature. After dose reduction
and treatment of the adverse effects, all of the symptoms resolved. However, low
drug tolerance was observed in our patients and attributed to the advanced ages of
the patients.
Conclusion
The efficacy of sorafenib is higher than the conventional chemotherapeutics, but
management of side effects is crucial. Therefore, the patients should be informed
about side effects before treatment and it should be used in experienced centers.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1162
EP1163
Biphasic synovial sarcoma: an exceptional rare cervical mass
Adina Ghemigian1, Mara Carsote1, Rodica Petris2, Anda Dumitrascu2,
Ana Valea3, Dana Terzea4 & Diana Loreta Paun1
1Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy and C.I.Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;2C.I.Parhon National
Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Romania;3I.Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy and Clinical County Hospital, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;4C.I.Parhon National Institute of Endocrinology and Monza
Oncoteam, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction
Synovial sarcoma represents a type of cancer derived from soft tissues; young
males are more affected.
Material and methods
This is a case report of a male with a cervical mass confirmed as sarcoma. Later on
the investigations lead to the discovery of a thyroid nodule challenging the
differential diagnosis. We assessed thyroid ultrasound, computed tomography
(CT)  at  the  cervical,  thorax,  mediastinum  and  abdomen;  TSH
(Thyroid
Stimulating  Hormone),  TPO antibodies
(anti-thyreoperoxidase); pathological
and immune-hysto-chemistry (IHC) reports.
Results
A 31-year patient accidentally discovered by self-palpation a right cervical mass
which required investigations including CT. An oval, well shaped, encapsulated
tumor of 4.7/3.5 cm (axial plane) was found with inhomogeneous structure (and
some areas of necrosis) at the level of right lateral wall of oro-pharynx. Cranio-
caudally, the mass was situated between cervical vertebras C2-C6. The lesion
was removed and a biphasic synovial sarcoma was confirmed: highly cellular
structure with oval cells and reduced eosinophilic cytoplasm, small amorphic
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
18th European Congress of Endocrinology 2016
cysts, multiple vascular elements of hemangioperycitoma- like pattern, and an
epithelial component with glandular elements. IHC revealed: positive VIM, TLE-
1, EMA, MIC2 in tumor cells, negative SOX10, S100, positive ACT and CD34
reaction for vessels. After surgery, CT did not find any secondary lesions (neither
local or at distance) except for a small thyroid nodule. The thyroid ultrasound
identified a hypo-echoic, inhomogeneous nodule of 1.44/0.78 cm at inferior right
lobe.  Endocrine  profile  revealed:  TSHZ1.27 mUI/ml
(N:
0.5-4.5 mUI/ml),
TPOZ10 UI/ml  (N:  0-35 UI/ml),  parathormon  of
43.54 pg/ml
(N:
15-
65 pg/ml).  Neuroendocrine  markers  were:  chromogranin  A  of
42 mg/ml
(N:
20-125  ng/ml),  neuron  specific  enolase  of
4.2 ng/ml
(N:
0-12 ng/ml),
circulating serotonin of 95.4 ng/ml (N: 40-400 ng/ml), calcitonin of 1 ng/ml
(1-11.8 ng/ml). Fine needle aspiration pointed benign features. Close follow-up is
recommended knowing the general oncologic and particular thyroid context.
Conclusion
Biphasic synovial sarcoma of cervical origin is extremely rare and thyroid may be
involved as a spreading site.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1163
EP1164
Bone metastatsis from differentiated thyroid cancer treated successfully
with I131: case report
Entela Puca, Blertina Olldashi2, Ema Lumi3, Arben Dhima1,
Kadir Burak Koza1, Sonila Bitri1 & Agron Ylli4
1American Hospital, Tirana, Albania;2Neo Style Clinic, Tirana, Albania;
3Regional Hospital, Korce, Albania;4UHC Mother Teresa, Tirana, Albania.
Differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) in general has a good prognosis when ist
diagnosed early. Late stage disease with bone metastasis may cause severe
complications, increases mortality rate, decreases the quality of life, and shortens
the patients’ survival. The treatment is still controversial. Surgery or radioiodine
therapy alone is usually unsatisfactory.
Case presentation
We report a case of a 40-year-old female presented, in August 2012, with a
complaint of the progressive swelling of her neck for the last year on left side. Her
past history was right thyroid lobectomy for multiple nodules at the age of 28,
biopsy was microfollicular adenoma. thyroid ultrasound showed hypoechoic
nodule 1.58!1.73!2.15 cm with increased flow on color Doppler. Thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) was 1.45 and thyroglobulin (Tg) was 948.9 mg/l
(range: 1-100 mg/l). Thyroid scan showed a cold nodule left lobe. FNA-cytology
was negative for malignancy. The patient was elected to proceed with completion
thyroidectomy. Surgical pathology showed Multifocal papillary thyroid cancer no
vascular or capsular invasion. On September 2012 she received 100 mCi and post
treatment whole body scan revealed uptake on thyroid bed and intense activity in
the region of the pelvis. Pelvic CT showed litic lesion in sacral bone. She started
treatment with Levothyroxine 175 mg/day. On April 2013 without treatment TSH
was132.4 Thyroglobulin 0.1 and the thyroglobulin antibodies (anti-TG) were
negative. Diagnostic whole body scan showed resolution of the previously seen
areas of uptake within the thyroid bed and pelvic area. On October 2015 she is on
treatment with LT4 175 mg/day Tg 0.01, TSH 0.05 and negative Anti TG. Pelvic
CT showed decreased litic lesion with peripheral sclerotic pattern.
Conclusion
This  case  demonstrates  the  benefits  of  RAI  therapy  even  in  patients  with
metastatic thyroid cancer treated successfully only with I131.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1164
EP1165
An unusual case in endocrinology practice: suture granuloma
Guven Baris  Cansu1, Bengur Taskiran1, Tulay Bakar2 &
Betul Peker Cengiz3
1Department of Endocrinology and Metabolsim, Yunusemre State Hospital,
Eskisehir, Turkey;2Department of Radiology, Yunusemre State Hospital,
Eskisehir, Turkey;3Department of Pathology, Yunusemre State Hospital,
Eskisehir, Turkey.
Background
Suture granuloma, the rare complication of thyroidectomy, results from use of
nonabsorbable suture materials. Despite its typical ultrasound images and benign
Endocrine Abstracts (2016) Vol 41
course, it carries utmost importance in differential diagnosis of lymph nodes,
recurrent nodules, and recurrence in case of thyroid cancers.
Case report
A 54-year-old female patient, who underwent bilateral thyroidectomy in July
2010,  was  diagnosed  with  multinodular  goiter  and  incidentally  discovered
micropapillary carcinoma (2 mm). Four years later she was readmitted to hospital
due to painless swelling in the right and left anterior neck region. Ultrasonography
revealed nodules with irregular boundaries, containing micro and macrocalcifica-
tions and hyperechoic lines in both sides of thyroid bed and isthmus. Fine needle
aspiration biopsy was performed in the right and left sided mass and cytologic
examination was compatible with the diagnosis of suture granuloma.
Conclusion
Suture  granuloma  should  be  considered  in  differential  diagnosis  of  local
recurrence of thyroid disease and lymph node metastasis in patients who undergo
thyroidectomy.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1165
EP1166
Sonographic findings that can be mistaken for thyroid cancer
Tae Hyun Kim, Shin Hyoung Jo & Soonho Kim
Kwangju Christian Hospital, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
Introduction
Thyroid nodule is a common disease that is found in 50% of the adult population;
of total, 5% of thyroid nodule cases are diagnosed as thyroid cancers. Thyroid
ultrasonography is the most sensitive diagnostic imaging method for the diagnosis
of thyroid cancer. The ultrasonographic findings that indicate malignancy are
taller than wider, speculate margins, marked hypoechoic lesion, microcalcifica-
tion, and macrocalcification. In contrast to findings indicating pure cyst, sponge
form is benign. Hence, knowledge of these ultrasonographic findings is helpful in
determining whether FNA (fine needle aspiration) is required to determine
malignancy of the thyroid nodule. In the cases presented herein, ultrasonographic
findings indicated malignancy. However, nodules were benign.
Case1
Sonographic findings after fluid drainage. Patient: aged 38 years, male. Figure
(1-1)  Ultrasonography  findings  show  irregular  margins.  Figure
(1-2)  Fluid
drainage the palpable neck nodule that the patient presented with 3 years ago.
Case 2
Sonographic findings after percutaneous ethanol injection therapy (PEIT).
Patient: aged 52 years, male. Figure (2-1) Ultrasonography findings show taller
than wider speculate margins. The findings also show microcalcification in the
middle. Figure (2-2) Percutaneous ethanol injection therapy performed for the
palpable neck nodule that the patient presented with 5 years ago.
Conclusion
When  performing  thyroid  ultrasonography,  it  is  important  to  consider  the
previous ultrasonographic findings and procedure history to avoid unnecessary
FNA.
DOI: 10.1530/endoabs.41.EP1166
